THIRTY-SEVEN

Roy McDougall’s car was standing in the driveway of the trailer lot on the Bend Road, and seeing it there on a weekday made Jimmy suspect the worst.

He and Mark got out, Jimmy carrying his black bag. They mounted the steps and Jimmy tried the bell. It didn’t work and so he knocked instead. The pounding roused no one in the McDougall trailer or in the neighboring one twenty yards down the road. There was a car in that driveway, too.

Jimmy tried the storm door and it was locked. “There’s a hammer in the backseat of the car,” he said.

Mark got it, and Jimmy smashed the glass of the storm door beside the knob. He reached through and unsnapped the catch. The inside door was unlocked. They went in.

The smell was definable instantly, and Jimmy felt his nostrils cringe against it and try to shut it out. The smell was not as strong as it had been in the basement of the Marsten House, but it was just as basically offensive—the smell of rot and deadness. A wet, putrefied stink. Jimmy found himself remembering when, as boys, he and his buddies had gone out on their bikes during spring vacation to pick up the returnable beer and soft-drink bottles the retreating snows had uncovered. In one of those (an Orange Crush bottle) he saw a small, decayed field mouse which had been attracted by the sweetness and had then been unable to get out. He had gotten a whiff of it and had immediately turned away and thrown up. This smell was plangently like that—sickish sweet and decayed sour, mixed together and fermenting wildly. He felt his gorge rise.

“They’re here,” Mark said. “Somewhere.”

They went through the place methodically—kitchen, dining nook, living room, the two bedrooms. They opened closets as they went. Jimmy thought they had found something in the master bedroom closet, but it was only a heap of dirty clothes.

“No cellar?” Mark asked.

“No, but there might be a crawl space.”

They went around to the back and saw a small door that swung inward, set into the trailer’s cheap concrete foundation. It was fastened with an old padlock. Jimmy knocked it off with five hard blows of the hammer, and when he pushed the half-trap open, the smell hit them in a ripe wave.

“There they are,” Mark said.

Peering in, Jimmy could see three sets of feet, like corpses lined up on a battlefield. One set wore work boots, one wore knitted bedroom slippers, and the third set—tiny feet indeed—were bare.

Family scene, Jimmy thought crazily. Reader’s Digest, where are you when we need you? Unreality washed over him. The baby, he thought. How are we supposed to do that to a little baby?

He made a mark with the black grease pencil on the trap and picked up the broken padlock. “Let’s go next door,” he said.

“Wait,” Mark said. “Let me pull one of them out.”

“Pull…? Why?”

“Maybe the daylight will kill them,” Mark said. “Maybe we won’t have to do that with the stakes.”

Jimmy felt hope. “Yeah, okay. Which one?”

“Not the baby,” Mark said instantly. “The man. You catch one foot.”

“All right,” Jimmy said. His mouth had gone cotton-dry, and when he swallowed there was a click in his throat.

Mark wriggled in on his stomach, the dead leaves that had drifted in crackling under his weight. He seized one of Roy McDougall’s work boots and pulled. Jimmy squirmed in beside him, scraping his back on the low overhang, fighting claustrophobia. He got hold of the other boot and together they pulled him out into the lessening drizzle and white light.

What followed was almost unbearable. Roy McDougall began to writhe as soon as the light struck him full, like a man who has been disturbed in sleep. Steam and moisture came from his pores, and the skin underwent a slight sagging and yellowing. Eyeballs rolled behind the thin skin of his closed lids. His feet kicked slowly and dreamily in the wet leaves. His upper lip curled back, showing upper incisors like those of a large dog—a German shepherd or a collie. His arms thrashed slowly, the hands clenching and unclenching, and when one of them brushed Mark’s shirt, he jerked back with a disgusted cry.

Roy turned over and began to hunch slowly back into the crawl space, arms and knees and face digging grooves in the rain-softened humus. Jimmy noted that a hitching, Cheyne-Stokes type of respiration had begun as soon as the light struck the body; it stopped as soon as McDougall was wholly in shadow again. So did the moisture extrusion.

When he had reached his previous resting place, McDougall turned over and lay still.

“Shut it,” Mark said in a strangled voice. “Please shut it.”

Jimmy closed the trap and replaced the hammered lock as well as he could. The image of McDougall’s body, struggling in the wet, rotted leaves like a dazed snake, remained in his mind. He did not think there would ever be a time when it was not within hand’s reach of his memory—even if he lived to be a hundred.


THIRTY-EIGHT

They stood in the rain, trembling, looking at each other. “Next door?” Mark asked.

“Yes. They’d be the logical ones for the McDougalls to attack first.”

They went across, and this time their nostrils picked up the telltale odor of rot in the dooryard. The name below the doorbell was Evans. Jimmy nodded. David Evans and family. He worked as a mechanic in the auto department of Sears in Gates Falls. He had treated him a couple of years ago, for a cyst or something.

This time the bell worked, but there was no response. They found Mrs Evans in bed. The two children were in a bunk bed in a single bedroom, dressed in identical pajamas that featured characters from the Pooh stories. It took longer to find Dave Evans. He had hidden himself away in the unfinished storage space over the small garage.

Jimmy marked a check inside a circle on the front door and the garage door. “We’re doing good,” he said. “Two for two.”

Mark said diffidently, “Could you hold on a minute or two? I’d like to wash my hands.”

“Sure,” Jimmy said. “I’d like that, too. The Evanses won’t mind if we use their bathroom.”

They went inside, and Jimmy sat down in one of the living room chairs and closed his eyes. Soon he heard Mark running water in the bathroom.

On the darkened screen of his eyes he saw the mortician’s table, saw the sheet covering Marjorie Glick’s body start to tremble, saw her hand fall out and begin its delicate toe dance on the air—

He opened his eyes.

This trailer was in nicer condition than the McDougalls’, neater, taken care of. He had never met Mrs Evans, but it seemed she must have taken pride in her home. There was a neat pile of the dead children’s toys in a small storage room, a room that had probably been called the laundry room in the mobile home dealer’s original brochure. Poor kids, he hoped they’d enjoyed the toys while there had still been bright days and sunshine to enjoy them in. There was a tricycle, several large plastic trucks and a play gas station, one of those caterpillars on wheels (there must have been some dandy fights over that), a toy pool table.

He started to look away and then looked back, startled.

Blue chalk.

Three shaded lights in a row.

Men walking around the green table under the bright lights, cueing up, brushing the grains of blue chalk off their fingertips—

“Mark!” he shouted, sitting bolt upright in the chair. “Mark!” And Mark came running with his shirt off, to see what the matter was.


THIRTY-NINE

An old student of Matt’s (class of ’64, A’s in literature, C’s in composition) had dropped by to see him around two-thirty, had commented on the stacks of arcane literature, and had asked Matt if he was studying for a degree in the occult. Matt couldn’t remember if his name was Herbert or Harold.

Matt, who had been reading a book called Strange Disappearances when Herbert-or-Harold walked in, welcomed the interruption. He was waiting for the phone to ring even now, although he knew the others could not safely enter the Brock Street School until after three o’clock. He was desperate to know what had happened to Father Callahan. And the day seemed to be passing with alarming rapidity—he had always heard that time passed slowly in the hospital. He felt slow and foggy, an old man at last.

He began telling Herbert-or-Harold about the town of Momson, Vermont, whose history he had just been reading. He had found it particularly interesting because he thought the story, if true, might be a precursor of the Lot’s fate.

“Everyone disappeared,” he told Herbert-or-Harold, who was listening with polite but not very well masked boredom. “Just a small town in the upcountry of northern Vermont, accessible by Interstate Route 2 and Vermont Route 19. Population of 312 in the census of 1920. In August of 1923 a woman in New York got worried because her sister hadn’t written her for two months. She and her husband took a ride out there, and they were the first to break the story to the newspapers, although I don’t doubt that the locals in the surrounding area had known about the disappearance for some time. The sister and her husband were gone, all right, and so was everyone else in Momson. The houses and the barns were all standing, and in one place supper had been put on the table. The case was rather sensational at the time. I don’t believe that I would care to stay there overnight. The author of this book claims the people in the neighboring townships tell some odd stories…ha’ants and goblins and all that. Several of the outlying barns have hex signs and large crosses painted on them, even to this day. Look, here’s a photograph of the general store and ethyl station and feed-and-grain store—what served in Momson as downtown. What do you suppose ever happened there?”

Herbert-or-Harold looked at the picture politely. Just a little town with a few stores and a few houses. Some of them were falling down, probably from the weight of snow in the winter. Could be any town in the country. Driving through most of them, you wouldn’t know if anyone was alive after eight o’clock when they rolled up the sidewalks. The old man had certainly gone dotty in his old age. Herbert-or-Harold thought about an old aunt of his who had become convinced in the last two years of her life that her daughter had killed her pet parakeet and was feeding it to her in the meat loaf. Old people got funny ideas.

“Very interesting,” he said, looking up. “But I don’t think…Mr Burke? Mr Burke, is something wrong? Are you…nurse! Hey, nurse!”

Matt’s eyes had grown very fixed. One hand gripped the top sheet of the bed. The other was pressed against his chest. His face had gone pallid, and a pulse beat in the center of his forehead.

Too soon, he thought. No, too soon—

Pain, smashing into him in waves, driving him down into darkness. Dimly he thought: Watch that last step, it’s a killer.

Then, falling.

Herbert-or-Harold ran out of the room, knocking over his chair and spilling a pile of books. The nurse was already coming, nearly running herself.

“It’s Mr Burke,” Herbert-or-Harold told her. He was still holding the book, with his index finger inserted at the picture of Momson, Vermont.

The nurse nodded curtly and entered the room. Matt was lying with his head half off the bed, his eyes closed.

“Is he—?” Herbert-or-Harold asked timidly. It was a complete question.

“Yes, I think so,” the nurse answered, at the same time pushing the button that would summon the ECV unit. “You’ll have to leave now.”

She was calm again now that all was known, and had time to regret her lunch, left half-eaten.


FORTY

“But there’s no pool hall in the Lot,” Mark said. “The closest one is over in Gates Falls. Would he go there?”

“No,” Jimmy said. “I’m sure he wouldn’t. But some people have pool tables or billiard tables in their houses.”

“Yes, I know that.”

“There’s something else,” Jimmy said. “I can almost get it.”

He leaned back, closed his eyes, and put his hands over them. There was something else, and in his mind he associated it with plastic. Why plastic? There were plastic toys and plastic utensils for picnics and plastic drop covers to put over your boat when winter came—

And suddenly a picture of a pool table draped in a large plastic dustcover formed in his mind, complete with sound track, a voiceover that was saying, I really ought to sell it before the felt gets mildew or something—Ed Craig says it might mildew—but it was Ralph’s…

He opened his eyes. “I know where he is,” he said. “I know where Barlow is. He’s in the basement of Eva Miller’s boardinghouse.” And it was true; he knew it was. It felt incontrovertibly right in his mind.

Mark’s eyes flashed brilliantly. “Let’s go get him.”

“Wait.”

He went to the phone, found Eva’s number in the book, and dialed it swiftly. It rang with no answer. Ten rings, eleven, a dozen. He put it back in its cradle, frightened. There had been at least ten roomers at Eva’s, many of them old men, retired. There was always someone around. Always before this.

He looked at his watch. It was quarter after three and time was racing, racing.

“Let’s go,” he said.

“What about Ben?”

Jimmy said grimly, “We can’t call. The line’s out at your house. If we go straight to Eva’s, there’ll be plenty of daylight left if we’re wrong. If we’re right, we’ll come back and get Ben and stop his fucking clock.”

“Let me put my shirt on again,” Mark said, and ran down the hall to the bathroom.


FORTY-ONE

Ben’s Citroën was still sitting in Eva’s parking lot, now plastered with wet leaves from the elms that shaded the square of gravel. The wind had picked up but the rain had stopped. The sign that said “Eva’s Rooms” swung and squeaked in the gray afternoon. The house had an eerie silence about it, a waiting quality, and Jimmy made a mental connection and was chilled by it. It was just like the Marsten House. He wondered if anyone had ever committed suicide here. Eva would know, but he didn’t think Eva would be talking…not anymore.

“It would be perfect,” he said aloud. “Take up residence in the local boardinghouse and then surround yourself with your children.”

“Are you sure we shouldn’t get Ben?”

“Later. Come on.”

They got out of the car and walked toward the porch. The wind pulled at their clothes, riffled their hair. All the shades were drawn, and the house seemed to brood over them.

“Can you smell it?” Jimmy asked.

“Yes. Thicker than ever.”

“Are you up to this?”

“Yes,” Mark said firmly. “Are you?”

“I hope to Christ I am,” Jimmy said.

They went up the porch steps and Jimmy tried the door. It was unlocked. When they stepped into Eva Miller’s compulsively neat big kitchen, the odor smote them both, like an open garbage pit—yet dry, as with the smoke of years.

Jimmy remembered his conversation with Eva—it had been almost four years ago, just after he had begun practicing. Eva had come in for a checkup. His father had had her for a patient for years, and when Jimmy took his place, even running things out of the same Cumberland office, she had come to him without embarrassment. They had spoken of Ralph, dead twelve years even then, and she had told him that Ralph’s ghost was still in the house—every now and then she would turn up something new and temporarily forgotten in the attic or a bureau drawer. And of course there was the pool table in the basement. She said that she really ought to get rid of it; it was just taking up space she could use for something else. But it had been Ralph’s, and she just couldn’t bring herself to take out an ad in the paper or call up the local radio “Yankee Trader” program.

Now they walked across the kitchen to the cellar door, and Jimmy opened it. The stench was thick, nearly overpowering. He thumbed the light switch but got no response. He would have broken that, of course.

“Look around,” he told Mark. “She’s got to have a flashlight, or candles.”

Mark began nosing around, pulling open drawers and looking into them. He noticed that the knife rack over the sink was empty, but thought nothing of it at the time. His heart was thudding with painful slowness, like a muffled drum. He recognized the fact that he was now on the far, ragged edges of his endurance, at the outer limits. His mind did not seem to be thinking, but only reacting. He kept seeing movement at the corners of his eyes and jerking his head around to look, seeing nothing. A war veteran might have recognized the symptoms which signaled the onset of battle fatigue.

He went out into the hall and looked through the dresser there. In the third drawer he found a long four-cell flashlight. He took it back to the kitchen. “Here it is, J—”

There was a rattling noise, followed by a heavy thump.

The cellar door stood open.

And the screams began.


FORTY-TWO

When Mark stepped back into the kitchen of Eva’s Rooms, it was twenty minutes of five. His eyes were hollow, and his T-shirt was smeared with blood. His eyes were stunned and slow.

Suddenly he shrieked.

The sound came roaring out of his belly, up the dark passage of his throat, and through his distended jaws. He shrieked until he felt some of the madness begin to leave his brain. He shrieked until his throat cracked and an awful pain lodged in his vocal cords like a sliver of bone. And even when he had externalized all the fear, the horror, the rage, the disappointment that he could, that awful pressure remained, coming up out of the cellar in waves—the knowledge of Barlow’s presence somewhere down there—and now it was close to dark.

He went outside onto the porch and breathed great gasps of the windy air. Ben. He had to get Ben. But an odd sort of lethargy seemed to have wrapped his legs in lead. What was the use? Barlow was going to win. They had been crazy to go against him. And now Jimmy had paid the full price, as well as Susan and the Father.

The steel in him came up. No. No. No.

He went down the porch steps on trembling legs and got into Jimmy’s Buick. The keys hung in the ignition.

Get Ben. Try once more.

His legs were too short to reach the pedals. He pulled the seat up and twisted the key. The engine roared. He put the gearshift lever in drive and put his foot on the gas. The car leaped forward. He slammed his foot down on the power brake and was thrown painfully into the steering wheel. The horn honked.

I can’t drive it!

And he seemed to hear his father saying in his logical, pedantic voice: You must be careful when you learn to drive, Mark. Driving is the only means of transportation that is not fully regulated by federal law. As a result, all the operators are amateurs. Many of these amateurs are suicidal. Therefore, you must be extremely careful. You use the gas pedal like there was an egg between it and your foot. When you’re driving a car with an automatic transmission, like ours, the left foot is not used at all. Only the right is used; first brake and then gas.

He let his foot off the brake and the car crawled forward down the driveway. It bumped over the curb and he brought it to a jerky stop. The windshield had fogged up. He rubbed it with his arm and only smeared it more.

“Screw it,” he muttered.

He started up jerkily and performed a wide, drunken U-turn, driving over the far curb in the process, and set off for his house. He had to crane his neck to see over the steering wheel. He fumbled out with his right hand and turned on the radio and played it loud. He was crying.


FORTY-THREE

Ben was walking down Jointner Avenue toward town when Jimmy’s tan Buick came up the road, moving in jerks and spasms, weaving drunkenly. He waved at it and it pulled over, bounced the left front wheel over the curb, and came to a stop.

He had lost track of time making the stakes, and when he looked at his watch, he had been startled to see that it was nearly ten minutes past four. He had shut down the lathe, taken a couple of the stakes, put them in his belt, and gone upstairs to use the telephone. He had only put his hand on it when he remembered it was out.

Badly worried now, he ran outside and looked in both cars, Callahan’s and Petrie’s. No keys in either. He could have gone back and searched Henry Petrie’s pockets, but the thought was too much. He had set off for town at a fast walk, keeping an eye peeled for Jimmy’s Buick. He had been intending to go straight to the Brock Street School when Jimmy’s car came into sight.

He ran around to the driver’s seat and Mark Petrie was sitting behind the wheel…alone. He looked at Ben numbly. His lips worked but no sound came out.

“What’s the matter? Where’s Jimmy?”

“Jimmy’s dead,” Mark said woodenly. “Barlow thought ahead of us again. He’s in the basement of Mrs Miller’s boardinghouse somewhere. Jimmy’s there, too. I went down to help him and I couldn’t get back out. Finally I got a board that I could crawl up, but at first I thought I was going to be trapped down there…until s-s-sunset…”

“What happened? What are you talking about?”

“Jimmy figured out the blue chalk, you see? While we were at a house in the Bend. Blue chalk. Pool tables. There’s a pool table in the cellar at Mrs Miller’s, it belonged to her husband. Jimmy called the boardinghouse and there was no answer so we drove over.”

He lifted his tearless face to Ben’s.

“He told me to look around for a flashlight because the cellar light switch was broken, just like at the Marsten House. So I started to look around. I…I noticed that all the knives in the rack over the sink were gone, but I didn’t think anything of it. So in a way I killed him. I did it. It’s my fault, all my fault, all my—”

Ben shook him: two brisk snaps. “Stop it, Mark. Stop it!”

Mark put his hands to his mouth, as if to catch the hysterical babble before it could flow out. His eyes stared hugely at Ben over his hands.

At last he went on: “I found a flashlight in the hall dresser, see. And that was when Jimmy fell, and he started to scream. He—I would have fallen, too, but he warned me. The last thing he said was Look out, Mark.”

“What was it?” Ben demanded.

“Barlow and the others just took the stairs away,” Mark said in a dead, listless voice. “Sawed the stairs off after the second one going down. They left a little more of the railing so it looked like…looked like…” He shook his head. “In the dark, Jimmy just thought they were there. You see?”

“Yes,” Ben said. He saw. It made him feel sick. “And the knives?”

“Set all around on the floor underneath,” Mark whispered. “They pounded the blades through these thin plywood squares and then knocked off the handles so they would sit flat with the blades pointing…pointing.”

“Oh,” Ben said helplessly. “Oh, Christ.” He reached down and took Mark by the shoulders. “Are you sure he’s dead, Mark?”

“Yes. He…he was stuck in half a dozen places. The blood…”

Ben looked at his watch. It was ten minutes of five. Again he had that feeling of being crowded, of running out of time.

“What are we going to do now?” Mark asked remotely.

“Go into town. Talk to Matt on the phone and then talk to Parkins Gillespie. We’ll finish Barlow before dark. We’ve got to.”

Mark smiled a small, morbid smile. “Jimmy said that, too. He said we were going to stop his clock. But he keeps beating us. Better guys than us must have tried, too.”

Ben looked down at the boy and got ready to do something nasty.

“You sound scared,” he said.

“I am scared,” Mark said, not rising to it. “Aren’t you?”

“I’m scared,” Ben said, “but I’m mad, too. I lost a girl I liked one hell of a lot. I loved her, I guess. We both lost Jimmy. You lost your mother and father. They’re lying in your living room under a dustcover from your sofa.” He pushed himself to a final brutality. “Want to go back and look?”

Mark winced away from him, his face horrified and hurting.

“I want you with me,” Ben said more softly. He felt a germ of self-disgust in his stomach. He sounded like a football coach before the big game. “I don’t care who’s tried to stop him before. I don’t care if Attila the Hun played him and lost. I’m going to have my shot. I want you with me. I need you.” And that was the truth, pure and naked.

“Okay,” Mark said. He looked down into his lap, and his hands found each other and entwined in distraught pantomime.

“Dig your feet in,” Ben said.

Mark looked at him hopelessly. “I’m trying,” he said.


FORTY-FOUR

Sonny’s Exxon station on outer Jointner Avenue was open and Sonny James (who exploited his country-music namesake with a huge color poster in the window beside a pyramid of oil cans) came out to wait on them himself. He was a small, gnomelike man whose receding hair was lawnmowered into a perpetual crew cut that showed his pink scalp.

“Hey there, Mr Mears, howya doin’? Where’s your Citrowan?”

“Laid up, Sonny. Where’s Pete?” Pete Cook was Sonny’s part-time help, and lived in town. Sonny did not.

“Never showed up today. Don’t matter. Things been slow, anyway. Town seems downright dead.”

Ben felt dark, hysterical laughter in his belly. It threatened to boil out of his mouth in a great and rancid wave.

“Want to fill it up?” he managed. “Want to use your phone.”

“Sure. Hi, kid. No school today?”

“I’m on a field trip with Mr Mears,” Mark said. “I had a bloody nose.”

“I guess to God you did. My brother used to get ’em. They’re a sign of high blood pressure, boy. You want to watch out.” He strolled to the back of Jimmy’s car and took off the gas cap.

Ben went inside and dialed the pay phone beside the rack of New England road maps.

“Cumberland Hospital, which department?”

“I’d like to speak with Mr Burke, please. Room 402.”

There was an uncharacteristic hesitation, and Ben was about to ask if the room had been changed when the voice said:

“Who is this, please?”

“Benjaman Mears.” The possibility of Matt’s death suddenly loomed up in his mind like a long shadow. Could that be? Surely not—that would be too much. “Is he all right?”

“Are you a relative?”

“No, a close friend. He isn’t—”

“Mr Burke died at 3:07 this afternoon, Mr Mears. If you’d like to hold for just a minute, I’ll see if Dr Cody has come in yet. Perhaps he could…”

The voice went on but Ben had ceased hearing it, although the receiver was still glued to his ear. The realization of how much he had been depending on Matt to get them through the rest of this nightmare afternoon crashed home with sickening weight. Matt was dead. Congestive heart failure. Natural causes. It was as if God Himself had turned His face away from them.

Just Mark and I now.

Susan, Jimmy, Father Callahan, Matt. All gone.

Panic seized him and he grappled with it silently.

He put the receiver back into its cradle without thinking about it, guillotining a question half-asked.

He walked back outside. It was ten after five. In the west the clouds were breaking up.

“Comes to just three dollars even,” Sonny told him brightly. “That’s Doc Cody’s car, ain’t it? I see them M.D. plates and it always makes me think of this movie I seen, this story about a bunch of crooks and one of them would always steal cars with M.D. plates because—”

Ben gave him three one-dollar bills. “I’ve got to split, Sonny. Sorry. I’ve got trouble.”

Sonny’s face crinkled up. “Gee, I’m sorry to hear that, Mr Mears. Bad news from your editor?”

“I guess you could say that.” He got behind the wheel, shut the door, pulled out, and left Sonny looking after him in his yellow foul-weather slicker.

“Matt’s dead, isn’t he?” Mark asked, watching him.

“Yes. Heart attack. How did you know?”

“Your face. I saw your face.”

It was 5:15.


FORTY-FIVE

Parkins Gillespie was standing on the small covered porch of the Municipal Building, smoking a Pall Mall and looking out at the western sky. He turned his attention to Ben Mears and Mark Petrie reluctantly. His face looked sad and old, like the glasses of water they bring you in cheap diners.

“How are you, Constable?” Ben asked.

“Tolerable,” Parkins allowed. He considered a hangnail on the leathery arc of skin that bordered his thumbnail. “Seen you truckin’ back and forth. Looked like the kid was drivin’ up from Railroad Street by hisself this last time. That so?”

“Yes,” Mark said.

“Almost got clipped. Fella goin’ the other way missed you by a whore’s hair.”

“Constable,” Ben said, “we want to tell you what’s been happening around here.”

Parkins Gillespie spat out the stub of his cigarette without raising his hands from the rail of the small covered porch. Without looking at either of them, he said calmly, “I don’t want to hear it.”

They looked at him dumbfounded.

“Nolly didn’t show up today,” Parkins said, still in that calm, conversational voice. “Somehow don’t think he will. He called in late last night and said he’d seen Homer McCaslin’s car out on the Deep Cut Road—I think it was the Deep Cut he said. He never called back in.” Slowly, sadly, like a man under water, he dipped into his shirt pocket and reached another Pall Mall out of it. He rolled it reflectively between his thumb and finger. “These fucking things are going to be the death of me,” he said.

Ben tried again. “The man who took the Marsten House, Gillespie. His name is Barlow. He’s in the basement of Eva Miller’s boardinghouse right now.”

“That so?” Parkins said with no particular surprise. “Vampire, ain’t he? Just like in all the comic books they used to put out twenty years ago.”

Ben said nothing. He felt more and more like a man lost in a great and grinding nightmare where clockwork ran on and on endlessly, unseen, but just below the surface of things.

“I’m leavin’ town,” Parkins said. “Got my stuff all packed up in the back of the car. I left my gun and the bubble and my badge in on the shelf. I’m done with lawin’. Goin’ t’see my sister in Kittery, I am. Figure that’s far enough to be safe.”

Ben heard himself say remotely, “You gutless creep. You cowardly piece of shit. This town is still alive and you’re running out on it.”

“It ain’t alive,” Parkins said, lighting his smoke with a wooden kitchen match. “That’s why he came here. It’s dead, like him. Has been for twenty years or more. Whole country’s goin’ the same way. Me and Nolly went to a drive-in show up in Falmouth a couple of weeks ago, just before they closed her down for the season. I seen more blood and killin’s in that first Western than I seen both years in Korea. Kids was eatin’ popcorn and cheerin’ ’em on.” He gestured vaguely at the town, now lying unnaturally gilded in the broken rays of the westering sun, like a dream village. “They prob’ly like bein’ vampires. But not me; Nolly’d be in after me tonight. I’m goin’.”

Ben looked at him helplessly.

“You two fellas want to get in that car and hit it out of here,” Parkins said. “This town will go on without us…for a while. Then it won’t matter.”

Yes, Ben thought. Why don’t we do that?

Mark spoke the reason for both of them. “Because he’s bad, mister. He’s really bad. That’s all.”

“Is that so?” Parkins said. He nodded and puffed his Pall Mall. “Well, okay.” He looked up toward the Consolidated High School. “Piss-poor attendance today, from the Lot, anyway. Buses runnin’ late, kids out sick, office phonin’ houses and not gettin’ any answer. The attendance officer called me, and I soothed him some. He’s a funny little baldheaded fella who thinks he knows what he’s doing. Well, the teachers are there, anyway. They come from out of town, mostly. They can teach each other.”

Thinking of Matt, Ben said, “Not all of them are from out of town.”

“It don’t matter,” Parkins said. His eyes dropped to the stakes in Ben’s belt. “You going to try to do that fella up with one of those?”

“Yes.”

“You can have my riot gun if you want it. That gun, it was Nolly’s idea. Nolly liked to go armed, he did. Not even a bank in town so’s he could hope someone would rob it. He’ll make a good vampire though, once he gets the hang of it.”

Mark was looking at him with rising horror, and Ben knew he had to get him away. This was the worst of all.

“Come on,” he said to Mark. “He’s done.”

“I guess that’s it,” Parkins said. His pale, crinkle-caught eyes surveyed the town. “Surely is quiet. I seen Mabel Werts, peekin’ out with her glasses, but I don’t guess there’s much to peek at, today. There’ll be more tonight, likely.”

They went back to the car. It was almost 5:30.


FORTY-SIX

They pulled up in front of St Andrew’s at quarter of six. Lengthening shadows fell from the church across the street to the rectory, covering it like a prophecy. Ben pulled Jimmy’s bag out of the backseat and dumped it out. He found several small ampoules, and dumped their contents out the window, saving the bottles.

“What are you doing?”

“We’re going to put holy water in these,” Ben said. “Come on.”

They went up the walk to the church and climbed the steps. Mark, about to open the middle door, paused and pointed. “Look at that.”

The handle was blackened and pulled slightly out of shape, as if a heavy electric charge had been pushed through it.

“Does that mean anything to you?” Ben asked.

“No. No, but…” Mark shook his head, pushing an unformed thought away. He opened the door and they went in. The church was cool and gray and filled with the endless pregnant pause that all empty altars of faith, white and black, have in common.

The two ranks of pews were split by a wide central aisle, and flanking this, two plaster angels stood cradling bowls of holy water, their calm and sweetly knowing faces bent, as if to catch their own reflections in the still water.

Ben put the ampoules in his pocket. “Bathe your face and hands,” he said.

Mark looked at him, troubled. “That’s sac—sacri—”

“Sacrilege? Not this time. Go ahead.”

They dunked their hands in the still water and then splashed it over their faces, the way a man who has just wakened will splash cold water into his eyes to shock the world back into them.

Ben took the first ampoule out of his pocket and was filling it when a shrill voice cried, “Here! Here now! What are you doing?”

Ben turned around. It was Rhoda Curless, Father Callahan’s housekeeper, who had been sitting in the first pew and twisting a rosary helplessly between her fingers. She was wearing a black dress, and her slip hung below the hem. Her hair was in disarray; she had been pulling her fingers through it.

“Where’s the Father? What are you doing?” Her voice was reedy and thin, close to hysteria.

“Who are you?” Ben asked.

“Mrs Curless. I’m Father Callahan’s housekeeper. Where’s the Father? What are you doing?” Her hands came together and began to war with each other.

“Father Callahan is gone,” Ben said, as gently as he could.

“Oh.” She closed her eyes. “Was he getting after whatever ails this town?”

“Yes,” Ben said.

“I knew it,” she said. “I didn’t have to ask. He’s a strong, good man of the cloth. There were always those who said he’d never be man enough to fill Father Bergeron’s shoes, but he filled ’em. They were too small for him, as it turned out.”

She opened her eyes wide and looked at them. A tear spilled from her left, and ran down her cheek. “He won’t be back, will he?”

“I don’t know,” Ben said.

“They talked about his drinkin’,” she said, as though she hadn’t heard. “Was there ever an Irish priest worth his keep who didn’t tip the bottle? None of that mollycoddlin’ wet-nursin’ church-bingo-prayer-basket for him. He was more’n that!” Her voice rose toward the vaulted ceiling in a hoarse, almost challenging cry. “He was a priest, not some holy alderman!”

Ben and Mark listened without speech or surprise. There was no surprise left on this dream-struck day; there was not even the capacity for it. They no longer saw themselves as doers or avengers or saviors; the day had absorbed them. Helplessly, they were only living.

“Was he strong when last you saw him?” she demanded, peering at them. The tears magnified the gimlet lack of compromise in her eyes.

“Yes,” Mark said, remembering Callahan in his mother’s kitchen, holding his cross aloft.

“And are you about his work now?”

“Yes,” Mark said again.

“Then be about it,” she snapped at them. “What are you waiting for?” And she left them, walking down the center aisle in her black dress, the solitary mourner at a funeral that hadn’t been held here.


FORTY-SEVEN

Eva’s again—and at the last. It was ten minutes after six. The sun hung over the western pines, peering out of the broken clouds like blood.

Ben drove into the parking lot and looked curiously up at his room. The shade was not drawn and he could see his typewriter standing sentinel, and beside it, his pile of manuscript and the glass globe paperweight on top of it. It seemed amazing that he could see all those things from here, see them clearly, as if everything in the world was sane and normal and ordered.

He let his eyes drop to the back porch. The rocking chairs where he and Susan had shared their first kiss stood side by side, unchanged. The door which gave ingress to the kitchen stood open, as Mark had left it.

“I can’t,” Mark muttered. “I just can’t.” His eyes were wide and white. He had drawn up his knees and was now crouched on the seat.

“It’s got to be both of us,” Ben said. He held out two of the ampoules filled with holy water. Mark twitched away from them in horror, as if touching them would admit poison through his skin. “Come on,” Ben said. He had no arguments left. “Come on, come on.”

“No.”

“Mark?”

“No!”

“Mark, I need you. You and me, that’s all that’s left.”

“I’ve done enough!” Mark cried. “I can’t do any more! Can’t you understand I can’t look at him?”

“Mark, it has to be the two of us. Don’t you know that?”

Mark took the ampoules and curled them slowly against his chest. “Oh boy,” he whispered. “Oh boy, oh boy.” He looked at Ben and nodded. The movement of his head was jerky and agonized. “Okay,” he said.

“Where’s the hammer?” he asked as they got out.

“Jimmy had it.”

“Okay.”

They walked up the porch steps in the strengthening wind. The sun glared red through the clouds, dyeing everything. Inside, in the kitchen, the stink of death was palpable and wet, pressing against them like granite. The cellar door stood open.

“I’m so scared,” Mark said, shuddering.

“You better be. Where’s that flashlight?”

“In the cellar. I left it when…”

“Okay.” They stood at the mouth of the cellar. As Mark had said, the stairs looked intact in the sunset light. “Follow me,” Ben said.


FORTY-EIGHT

Ben thought quite easily: I’m going to my death.

The thought came naturally, and there was no fear or regret in it. Inward-turning emotions were lost under the overwhelming atmosphere of evil that hung over this place. As he slipped and scraped his way down the board Mark had set up to get out of the cellar, all he felt was an unnatural glacial calm. He saw that his hands were glowing, as if wreathed in ghost gloves. It did not surprise him.

Let be be finale of seem. The only emperor is the emperor of ice cream. Who had said that? Matt? Matt was dead. Susan was dead. Miranda was dead. Wallace Stevens was dead, too. I wouldn’t look at that, if I were you. But he had looked. That’s what you looked like when it was over. Like something smashed and broken that had been filled with different-colored fluids. It wasn’t so bad. Not so bad as his death. Jimmy had been carrying McCaslin’s pistol; it would still be in his coat pocket. He would take it, and if sunset came before they could get to Barlow…first the boy, and then himself. Not good, but better than his death.

He dropped to the cellar floor and then helped Mark down. The boy’s eyes flashed to the dark, curled thing on the floor and then skipped away.

“I can’t look at that,” he said huskily.

“That’s all right.”

Mark turned away and Ben knelt down. He swept away a number of the lethal plywood squares, the knife blades thrust through them glittering like dragon’s teeth. Gently, then, he turned Jimmy over.

I wouldn’t look at that, if I were you.

“Oh, Jimmy,” he tried to say, and the words broke open and bled in his throat. He cradled Jimmy in the curve of his left arm and pulled Barlow’s blades out of him with his right hand. There were six of them, and Jimmy had bled a great deal.

There was a neatly folded stack of living room drapes on a corner shelf. He took them over to Jimmy and spread them over his body after he had the gun and the flashlight and the hammer.

He stood up and tried the flashlight. The plastic lens cover had cracked, but the bulb still worked. He flashed it around. Nothing. He shone it under the pool table. Bare. Nothing behind the furnace. Racks of preserves, and a wallboard hung with tools. The amputated stairs, pushed over in the far corner so they would be out of sight from the kitchen. They looked like a scaffold leading nowhere.

“Where is he?” Ben muttered. He glanced at his watch, and the hands stood at 6:23. When was sunset? He couldn’t remember. Surely no later than 6:55. That gave them a bare half hour.

“Where is he?” he cried out. “I can feel him, but where is he?”

“There!” Mark cried, pointing with one glowing hand. “What’s that?”

Ben centered the light on it. A Welsh dresser. “It’s not big enough,” he said to Mark. “And it’s flush against the wall.”

“Let’s look behind it.”

Ben shrugged. They crossed the room to the Welsh dresser and each took a side. He felt a trickle of building excitement. Surely the odor or aura or atmosphere or whatever you wanted to call it was thicker here, more offensive?

Ben glanced up at the open kitchen door. The light was dimmer now. The gold was fading out of it.

“It’s too heavy for me,” Mark panted.

“Never mind,” Ben said. “We’re going to tip it over. Get your best hold.”

Mark bent over it, his shoulder against the wood. His eyes looked fiercely out of his glowing face. “Okay.”

They threw their combined weight against it and the Welsh dresser went over with a bonelike crash as Eva Miller’s long-ago wedding china shattered inside.

“I knew it!” Mark cried triumphantly.

There was a small door, chest-high, set into the wall where the Welsh dresser had been. A new Yale padlock secured the hasp.

Two hard swings of the hammer convinced him that the lock wasn’t going to give. “Jesus Christ,” he muttered softly. Frustration welled up bitterly in his throat. To be balked like this at the end, balked by a five-dollar padlock—

No. He would bite through the wood with his teeth if he had to.

He shone the flashlight around, and its beam fell on the neatly hung tool board to the right of the stairs. Hung on two of its steel pegs was an ax with a rubber cover masking its blade.

He ran across, snatched it off the wallboard, and pulled the rubber cover from the blade. He took one of the ampoules from his pocket and dropped it. The holy water ran out on the floor, beginning to glow immediately. He got another one, twisted the small cap off, and doused the blade of the ax. It began to glimmer with eldritch fairy-light. And when he set his hands on the wooden haft, the grip felt incredibly good, incredibly right. Power seemed to have welded his flesh into its present grip. He stood holding it for a moment, looking at the shining blade, and some curious impulse made him touch it to his forehead. A hard sense of sureness clasped him, a feeling of inevitable rightness, of whiteness. For the first time in weeks he felt he was no longer groping through fogs of belief and unbelief, sparring with a partner whose body was too insubstantial to sustain blows.

Power, humming up his arms like volts.

The blade glowed brighter.

“Do it!” Mark pleaded. “Quick! Please!”

Ben Mears spread his feet, slung the ax back, and brought it down in a gleaming arc that left an afterimage on the eye. The blade bit wood with a booming, portentous sound and sunk to the haft. Splinters flew.

He pulled it out, the wood screaming against the steel. He brought it down again…again…again. He could feel the muscles of his back and arms flexing and meshing, moving with a sureness and a studied heat that they had never known before. Each blow sent chips and splinters flying like shrapnel. On the fifth blow the blade crashed through to emptiness and he began hacking the hole wider with a speed that approached frenzy.

Mark stared at him, amazed. The cold blue fire had crept down the ax handle and spread up his arms until he seemed to be working in a column of fire. His head was twisted to one side, the muscles of his neck corded with strain, one eye open and glaring, the other squeezed shut. The back of his shirt had split between the straining wings of his shoulder blades, and the muscles writhed beneath the skin like ropes. He was a man taken over, possessed, and Mark saw without knowing (or having to know) that the possession was not in the least Christian; the good was more elemental, less refined. It was ore, like something coughed up out of the ground in naked chunks. There was nothing finished about it. It was Force; it was Power; it was whatever moved the greatest wheels of the universe.

The door to Eva Miller’s root cellar could not stand before it. The ax began to move at a nearly blinding speed; it became a ripple, a descending arc, a rainbow from over Ben’s shoulder to the splintered wood of the last door.

He dealt it a final blow and slung the ax away. He held his hands up before his eyes. They blazed.

He held them out to Mark, and the boy flinched.

“I love you,” Ben said.

They clasped hands.


FORTY-NINE

The root cellar was small and cell-like, empty except for a few dusty bottles, some crates, and a dusty bushel basket of very old potatoes that were sprouting eyes in every direction—and the bodies. Barlow’s coffin stood at the far end, propped up against the wall like a mummy’s sarcophagus, and the crest on it blazed coldly in the light they carried with them like St Elmo’s fire.

In front of the coffin, leading up to it like railroad ties, were the bodies of the people Ben had lived with and broken bread with: Eva Miller, and Weasel Craig beside her; Mabel Mullican from the room at the end of the second-floor hall; John Snow, who had been on the county and could barely walk down to the breakfast table with his arthritis; Vinnie Upshaw; Grover Verrill.

They stepped over them and stood by the coffin. Ben glanced down at his watch; it was 6:40.

“We’re going to take it out there,” he said. “By Jimmy.”

“It must weigh a ton,” Mark said.

“We can do it.” He reached out, almost tentatively, and then grasped the upper right corner of the coffin. The crest glittered like an impassioned eye. The wood was crawlingly unpleasant to the touch, smooth and stonelike with years. There seemed to be no pores in the wood, no small imperfections for the fingers to recognize and mold to. Yet it rocked easily. One hand did it.

He tipped it forward with a small push, feeling the great weight held in check as if by invisible counterweights. Something thumped inside. Ben took the weight of the coffin on one hand.

“Now,” he said. “Your end.”

Mark lifted and the end of the coffin came up easily. The boy’s face filled with pleased amazement. “I think I could do it with one finger.”

“You probably could. Things are finally running our way. But we have to be quick.”

They carried the coffin through the shattered door. It threatened to stick at its widest point, and Mark lowered his head and shoved. It went through with a wooden scream.

They carried it across to where Jimmy lay, covered with Eva Miller’s drapes.

“Here he is, Jimmy,” Ben said. “Here the bastard is. Set it down, Mark.”

He glanced at his watch again. 6:45. Now the light coming through the kitchen door above them was an ashy gray.

“Now?” Mark asked.

They looked at each other over the coffin.

“Yes,” Ben said.

Mark came around and they stood together in front of the coffin’s locks and seals. They bent together, and the locks split as they touched them, making a sound like thin, snapping clapboards. They lifted.

Barlow lay before them, his eyes glaring upward.

He was a young man now, his black hair vibrant and lustrous, flowing over the satin pillow at the head of his narrow apartment. His skin glowed with life. The cheeks were as ruddy as wine. His teeth curved out over his full lips, white with strong streaks of yellow, like ivory.

“He—” Mark began, and never finished.

Barlow’s red eyes rolled in their sockets, filling with a hideous life and mocking triumph. They locked with Mark’s eyes and Mark gaped down into them, his own eyes growing blank and far away.

“Don’t look at him!” Ben cried, but it was too late.

He knocked Mark away. The boy whined deep in his throat and suddenly attacked Ben. Taken by surprise, Ben staggered backward. A moment later the boy’s hands were in his coat pocket, digging for Homer McCaslin’s pistol.

“Mark! Don’t—”

But the boy didn’t hear. His face was as blank as a washed blackboard. The whining went on and on in his throat, the sound of a very small trapped animal. He had both hands around the pistol. They struggled for it, Ben trying to rip it from the boy’s grasp and keep it pointed away from both of them.

“Mark!” he bellowed. “Mark, wake up! For Christ’s sake—”

The muzzle jerked down toward his head and the gun went off. He felt the slug pass by his temple. He wrapped his hands around Mark’s and kicked out with one foot. Mark staggered backward, and the gun clattered on the floor between them. The boy leaped at it, whining, and Ben punched him in the mouth with all the strength he had. He felt the boy’s lips mash back against his teeth and cried out as if he himself had been hit. Mark slipped to his knees, and Ben kicked the gun away. Mark tried to go after it crawling, and Ben hit him again.

With a tired sigh, the boy collapsed.

The strength had left him now, and the sureness. He was only Ben Mears again, and he was afraid.

The square of light in the kitchen doorway had faded to thin purple; his watch said 6:51.

A huge force seemed to be dragging at his head, commanding him to look at the rosy, gorged parasite in the coffin beside him.

Look and see me, puny man. Look upon Barlow, who has passed the centuries as you have passed hours before a fireplace with a book. Look and see the great creature of the night whom you would slay with your miserable little stick. Look upon me, scribbler. I have written in human lives, and blood has been my ink. Look upon me and despair!

Jimmy, I can’t do it. It’s too late, he’s too strong for me—

LOOK AT ME!

It was 6:53.

Mark groaned on the floor. “Mom? Momma, where are you? My head hurts…it’s dark…”

He shall enter my service castratum…

Ben fumbled one of the stakes from his belt and dropped it. He cried out miserably, in utter despair. Outside, the sun had deserted Jerusalem’s Lot. Its last rays lingered on the roof of the Marsten House.

He snatched the stake up. But where was the hammer? Where was the fucking hammer?

By the root cellar door. He had swung at the padlock with it.

He scrambled across the cellar and picked it up where it lay.

Mark was half sitting, his mouth a bloody gash. He wiped a hand across it and looked dazedly at the blood. “Momma!” he cried. “Where’s my mother?”

6:55 now. Light and darkness hung perfectly balanced.

Ben ran back across the darkening cellar, the stake clutched in his left hand, the hammer in his right.

There was a booming, triumphant laugh. Barlow was sitting up in his coffin, those red eyes flashing with hellish triumph. They locked with Ben’s, and he felt the will draining away from him.

With a mad, convulsive yell, he raised the stake over his head and brought it down in a whistling arc. Its razored point sheared through Barlow’s shirt, and he felt it strike into the flesh beneath.

Barlow screamed. It was an eerie, hurt sound, like the howl of a wolf. The force of the stake slamming home drove him back into the coffin on his back. His hands rose out of it, hooked into claws, waving crazily.

Ben brought the hammer down on the top of the stake, and Barlow screamed again. One of his hands, as cold as the grave, seized Ben’s left hand, which was locked around the stake.

Ben wriggled into the coffin, his knees planted on Barlow’s knees. He stared down into the hate and pain-driven face.

“Let me GO!” Barlow cried.

“Here it comes, you bastard,” Ben sobbed. “Here it is, leech. Here it is for you.”

He brought the hammer down again. Blood splashed upward in a cold gush, blinding him momentarily. Barlow’s head lashed from side to side on the satin pillow.

“Let me go, you dare not, you dare not, you dare not do this—”

He brought the hammer down again and again. Blood burst from Barlow’s nostrils. His body began to jerk in the coffin like a stabbed fish. The hands clawed at Ben’s cheeks, pulling long gouges in his skin.

“LET ME GOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO—”

He brought the hammer down on the stake once more, and the blood that pulsed from Barlow’s chest turned black.

Then, dissolution.

It came in the space of two seconds, too fast to ever be believed in the daylight of later years, yet slow enough to recur again and again in nightmares, with awful stop-motion slowness.

The skin yellowed, coarsened, blistered like old sheets of canvas. The eyes faded, filmed white, fell in. The hair went white and fell like a drift of feathers. The body inside the dark suit shriveled and retreated. The mouth widened gapingly as the lips drew back and drew back, meeting the nose and disappearing in an oral ring of jutting teeth. The fingernails went black and peeled off, and then there were only bones, still dressed with rings, clicking and clenching like castanets. Dust puffed through the fibers of the linen shirt. The bald and wrinkled head became a skull. The pants, with nothing to fill them out, fell away to broomsticks clad in black silk. For a moment a hideously animated scarecrow writhed beneath him, and Ben lunged out of the coffin with a strangled cry of horror. But it was impossible to tear the gaze away from Barlow’s last metamorphosis; it hypnotized. The fleshless skull whipped from side to side on the satin pillow. The nude jawbone opened in a soundless scream that had no vocal cords to power it. The skeletal fingers danced and clicked on the dark air like marionettes.

Smells struck his nose and then vanished, each in a tight little puff: gas; putrescence, horrid and fleshy; a moldy library smell; acrid dust; then nothing. The twisting, protesting finger bones shredded and flaked away like pencils. The nasal cavity of the skull widened and met the oral cavity. The empty eye sockets widened in a fleshless expression of surprise and horror, met, and were no more. The skull caved in like an ancient Ming vase. The clothes settled flat and became as neutral as dirty laundry.

And still there was no end to its tenacious hold on the world—even the dust billowed and writhed in tiny dust devils within the coffin. And then, suddenly, he felt the passage of something which buffeted past him like a strong wind, making him shudder. At the same instant, every window of Eva Miller’s boardinghouse blew outward.

“Look out, Ben!” Mark screamed. “Look out!”

He whirled over on his back and saw them coming out of the root cellar—Eva, Weasel, Mabel, Grover, and the others. Their time was on the world.

Mark’s screams echoed in his ears like great fire bells, and he grabbed the boy by the shoulders.

“The holy water!” he yelled into Mark’s tormented face. “They can’t touch us!”

Mark’s cries turned to whimpers.

“Go up the board,” Ben said. “Go on.” He had to turn the boy to face it, and then slap his bottom to make him climb. When he was sure the boy was going up, he turned back and looked at them, the Undead.

They were standing passively some fifteen feet away, looking at him with a flat hate that was not human.

“You killed the Master,” Eva said, and he could almost believe there was grief in her voice. “How could you kill the Master?”

“I’ll be back,” he told her. “For all of you.”

He went up the board, climbing bent over, using his hands. It groaned under his weight, but held. At the top, he spared one glance back down. They were gathered around the coffin now, looking in silently. They reminded him of the people who had gathered around Miranda’s body after the accident with the moving van.

He looked around for Mark, and saw him lying by the porch door, on his face.


FIFTY

Ben told himself that the boy had just fainted, and nothing more. It might be true. His pulse was strong and regular. He gathered him in his arms and carried him out to the Citroën.

He got behind the wheel and started the engine. As he pulled out onto Railroad Street, delayed reaction struck him like a physical blow, and he had to stifle a scream.

They were in the streets, the walking dead.

Cold and hot, his head full of a wild roaring sound, he turned left on Jointner Avenue and drove out of ’salem’s Lot.





Chapter Fifteen

Ben and Mark

Mark woke up a little at a time, letting the Citroën’s steady hum bring him back without thought or memory. At last he looked out the window, and fright took him in rough hands. It was dark. The trees at the sides of the road were vague blurs, and the cars that passed them had their parking lights and headlights on. A gagging, inarticulate groan escaped him, and he clawed at his neck for the cross that still hung there.

“Relax,” Ben said. “We’re out of town. It’s twenty miles behind us.”

The boy reached over him, almost making him swerve, and locked the driver’s side door. Whirling, he locked his own door. Then he crouched slowly down in a ball on his side of the seat. He wished the nothingness would come back. The nothingness was nice. Nice nothingness with no nasty pictures in it.

The steady sound of the Citroën’s engine was soothing. Mmmmmmmmmmm. Nice. He closed his eyes.

“Mark?”

Safer not to answer.

“Mark, are you all right?”

Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm.

“—mark—”

Far away. That was all right. Nice nothingness came back, and shades of gray swallowed him.


TWO

Ben checked them into a motel just across the New Hampshire state line, signing the register Ben Cody and Son, scrawling it. Mark walked into the room holding his cross out. His eyes darted from side to side in their sockets like small, trapped beasts. He held the cross until Ben had closed the door, locked it, and hung his own cross from the doorknob. There was a color TV and Ben watched it for a while. Two African nations had gone to war. The President had a cold but it wasn’t considered serious. And a man in Los Angeles had gone berserk and shot fourteen people. The weather forecast was for rain—snow flurries in northern Maine.


THREE

’Salem’s Lot slept darkly, and the vampires walked its streets and country roads like a trace memory of evil. Some of them had emerged enough from the shadows of death to have regained some rudimentary cunning. Lawrence Crockett called up Royal Snow and invited him over to the office to play some cribbage. When Royal pulled up front and walked in, Lawrence and his wife fell on him. Glynis Mayberry called Mabel Werts, said she was frightened, and asked if she could come over and spend the evening with her until her husband got back from Waterville. Mabel agreed with almost pitiful relief, and when she opened the door ten minutes later, Glynis was standing there stark naked, her purse over her arm, grinning with huge, ravenous incisors. Mabel had time to scream, but only once. When Delbert Markey stepped out of his deserted tavern just after eight o’clock, Carl Foreman and a grinning Homer McCaslin stepped out of the shadows and said they had come for a drink. Milt Crossen was visited at his store just after closing time by a number of his most faithful customers and oldest cronies. And George Middler visited several of the high school boys who bought things at his store and always had looked at him with a mixture of scorn and knowledge; and his darkest fantasies were satisfied.

Tourists and through-travelers still passed by on Route 12, seeing nothing of the Lot but an Elks billboard and a thirty-five-mile-an-hour speed sign. Outside of town they went back up to sixty and perhaps dismissed it with a single thought: Christ, what a dead little place.

The town kept its secrets, and the Marsten House brooded over it like a ruined king.


FOUR

Ben drove back the next day at dawn, leaving Mark in the motel room. He stopped at a busy hardware store in Westbrook and bought a spade and a pick.

’Salem’s Lot lay silent under a dark sky from which rain had not yet begun to fall. Few cars moved on the streets. Spencer’s was open but now the Excellent Café was shut up, all the green blinds drawn, the menus removed from the windows, the small daily special chalkboard erased clean.

The empty streets made him feel cold in his bones, and an image came to mind, an old rock ’n’ roll album with a picture of a transvestite on the front, profile shot against a black background, the strangely masculine face bleeding with rouge and paint; title: “They Only Come Out at Night.”

He went to Eva’s first, climbed the stairs to the second floor, and pushed the door to his room open. Just the same as he had left it, the bed unmade, an open roll of Life Savers on his desk. There was an empty tin wastebasket under the desk and he pulled it out into the middle of the floor.

He took his manuscript, threw it in, and made a paper spill of the title page. He lit it with his Cricket, and when it flared up he tossed it in on top of the drift of typewritten pages. The flame tasted them, found them good, and began to crawl eagerly over the paper. Corners charred, turned upward, blackened. Whitish smoke began to billow out of the wastebasket, and without thinking about it, he leaned over his desk and opened the window.

His hand found the paperweight—the glass globe that had been with him since his boyhood in this nighted town—grabbed unknowing in a dreamlike visit to a monster’s house. Shake it up and watch the snow float down.

He did it now, holding it up before his eyes as he had as a boy, and it did its old, old trick. Through the floating snow you could see a little gingerbread house with a path leading up to it. The gingerbread shutters were closed, but as an imaginative boy (as Mark Petrie was now), you could fancy that one of the shutters was being folded back (as indeed, one of them seemed to be folding back now) by a long white hand, and then a pallid face would be looking out at you, grinning with long teeth, inviting you into this house beyond the world in its slow and endless fantasyland of false snow, where time was a myth. The face was looking out at him now, pallid and hungry, a face that would never look on daylight or blue skies again.

It was his own face.

He threw the paperweight into the corner and it shattered.

He left without waiting to see what might leak out of it.


FIVE

He went down into the cellar to get Jimmy’s body, and that was the hardest trip of all. The coffin lay where it had the night before, empty even of dust. Yet…not entirely empty. The stake was in there, and something else. He felt his gorge rise. Teeth. Barlow’s teeth—all that was left of him. Ben reached down, picked them up—and they twisted in his hand like tiny white animals, trying to come together and bite.

With a disgusted cry he threw them outward, scattering them.

“God,” he whispered, rubbing his hand against his shirt. “Oh, my dear God. Please let that be the end. Let it be the end of him.”


SIX

Somehow he managed to get Jimmy, still bundled up in Eva’s drapes, out of the cellar. He tucked the bundle into the trunk of Jimmy’s Buick and then drove out to the Petrie house, the pick and shovel resting next to Jimmy’s black bag in the backseat. In a wooded clearing behind the Petrie house and close to the babble of Taggart Stream, he spent the rest of the morning and half the afternoon digging a wide grave four feet deep. Into it he put Jimmy’s body and the Petries, still wrapped in the sofa dustcover.

He began filling in the grave of these clean ones at two-thirty. He began to shovel faster and faster as the light began its long drain from the cloudy sky. Sweat that was not wholly from exertion condensed on his skin.

The hole was filled in by four. He tamped in the sods as well as he could, and drove back to town with the earth-clotted pick and shovel in the trunk of Jimmy’s car. He parked it in front of the Excellent Café, leaving the keys in the ignition.

He paused for a moment, looking around. The deserted business buildings with their false fronts seemed to lean crepitatingly over the street. The rain, which had started around noon, fell softly and slowly, as if in mourning. The little park where he had met Susan Norton was empty and forlorn. The shades of the Municipal Building were drawn. A “Be back soon” sign hung in the window of Larry Crockett’s Insurance and Real Estate office with hollow jauntiness. And the only sound was soft rain.

He walked up toward Railroad Street, his heels clicking emptily on the sidewalk. When he got to Eva’s, he paused by his car for a moment, looking around for the last time. Nothing moved.

The town was dead. All at once he knew it for sure and true, just as he had known for sure that Miranda was dead when he had seen her shoe lying in the road.

He began to cry.

He was still crying when he drove past the Elks sign, which read: “You are now leaving Jerusalem’s Lot, a nice little town. Come again!”

He got on the turnpike. The Marsten House was blotted out by the trees as he went down the feeder ramp. He began to drive south toward Mark, toward his life.





Epilogue

Among these decimated villages

Upon this headland naked to the south wind

With the trail of mountains before us, hiding you,

Who will reckon up our decision to forget?

Who will accept our offering at this end of autumn?

GEORGE SEFERIS





Now she’s eyeless.

The snakes she held once

Eat up her hands.

GEORGE SEFERIS


From a scrapbook kept by Ben Mears (all clippings from the Portland Press-Herald):


November 19, 1975 (p. 27):

JERUSALEM’S LOT—The Charles V. Pritchett family, who bought a farm in the Cumberland County town of Jerusalem’s Lot only a month ago, are moving out because things keep going bump in the night, according to Charles and Amanda Pritchett, who moved here from Portland. The farm, a local landmark on Schoolyard Hill, was previously owned by Charles Griffen. Griffen’s father was the owner of Sunshine Dairy, Inc., which was absorbed by the Slewfoot Dairy Corporation in 1962. Charles Griffen, who sold the farm through a Portland realtor for what Pritchett called “a bargain basement price,” could not be reached for comment. Amanda Pritchett first told her husband about the “funny noises” in the hayloft shortly after…


January 4, 1976 (p. 1):

JERUSALEM’S LOT—A bizarre car crash occurred last night or early this morning in the small southern Maine town of Jerusalem’s Lot. Police theorize from skid marks found near the scene that the car, a late-model sedan, was traveling at an excessive speed when it left the road and struck a Central Maine Power utility pole. The car was a total wreck, but although blood was found on the front seat and the dashboard, no passengers have yet been found. Police say that the car was registered to Mr Gordon Phillips of Scarborough. According to a neighbor, Phillips and his family had been on their way to see relatives in Yarmouth. Police theorize that Phillips, his wife, and their two children may have wandered off in a daze and become lost. Plans for a search have been…


February 14, 1976 (p. 4):

CUMBERLAND—Mrs Fiona Coggins, a widow who lived alone on the Smith Road in West Cumberland, was reported missing this morning to the Cumberland County sheriff ’s office by her niece, Mrs Gertrude Hersey. Mrs Hersey told police officers that her aunt was a shut-in and is in poor health. Sheriff ’s deputies are investigating, but claim that at this point it is impossible to say what…


February 27, 1976 (p. 6):

FALMOUTH—John Farrington, an elderly farmer and lifelong Falmouth resident, was found dead in his barn early this morning by his son-in-law, Frank Vickery. Vickery said Farrington was lying facedown outside a low haymow, a pitchfork near one hand. County Medical Examiner David Rice says Farrington apparently died of a massive hemorrhage, or perhaps internal bleeding…


May 20, 1976 (p. 17):

PORTLAND—Cumberland County game wardens have been instructed by the Maine State Wildlife Service to be on the lookout for a wild dog pack that may be running in the Jerusalem’s Lot-Cumber-land-Falmouth area. During the last month, several sheep have been found dead with their throats and bellies mangled. In some cases, sheep have been disemboweled. Deputy Game Warden Upton Pruitt said, “As you know, this situation has worsened a good deal in southern Maine…”


May 29, 1976 (p. 1):

JERUSALEM’S LOT—Possible foul play is suspected in the disappearance of the Daniel Holloway family, who had moved into a house on the Taggart Stream Road in this small Cumberland County township recently. Police were alerted by Daniel Holloway’s grandfather, who became alarmed at the repeated failure of anyone to answer his telephone calls.

The Holloways and their two children moved onto the Taggart Stream Road in April, and had complained to both friends and relatives of hearing “funny noises” after dark.

Jerusalem’s Lot has been at the center of several strange occurrences during the last several months, and a great many families have…


June 4, 1976 (p. 2):

CUMBERLAND—Mrs Elaine Tremont, a widow who owns a small house on the Back Stage Road in the western part of this small Cumberland County village, was admitted to Cumberland Receiving Hospital early this morning with a heart attack. She told a reporter from this paper that she had heard a scratching noise at her bedroom window while she was watching television, and looked up to see a face peering in at her.

“It was grinning,” Mrs Tremont said. “It was horrible. I’ve never been so frightened in my life. And since that family was killed just a mile away on the Taggart Stream Road, I’ve been frightened all the time.”

Mrs Tremont referred to the Daniel Holloway family, who disappeared from their Jerusalem’s Lot residence some time early last week. Police said the connection was being investigated, but…


TWO

The tall man and the boy arrived in Portland in mid-September and stayed at a local motel for three weeks. They were used to heat, but after the dry climate of Los Zapatos, they both found the high humidity enervating. They both swam in the motel pool a great deal and watched the sky a great deal. The man got the Portland Press-Herald every day, and now the copies were fresh, unmarked by time or dog urine. He read the weather forecasts and he watched for items concerning Jerusalem’s Lot. On the ninth day of their stay in Portland, a man in Falmouth disappeared. His dog was found dead in the yard. Police were looking into it.

The man rose early on October 6 and stood in the forecourt of the motel. Most of the tourists were gone now, back to New York and New Jersey and Florida, to Ontario and Nova Scotia, to Pennsylvania and California. The tourists left their litter and their summer dollars and the natives to enjoy their state’s most beautiful season.

This morning there was something new in the air. The smell of exhaust from the main road was not so great. There was no haze on the horizon, and no ground fog lying milkily around the legs of the billboard in the field across the way. The morning sky was very clear, and the air was chill. Indian summer seemed to have left overnight.

The boy came out and stood beside him.

The man said: “Today.”


THREE

It was almost noon when they got to the ’salem’s Lot turnoff, and Ben was reminded achingly of the day he had arrived here determined to exorcise all the demons that had haunted him, and confident of his success. That day had been warmer than this, the wind had not been so strong out of the west, and Indian summer had only been beginning. He remembered two boys with fishing poles. The sky today was a harder blue, colder.

The car radio proclaimed that the fire index was at five, its second-highest reading. There had been no significant rainfall in southern Maine since the first week of September. The deejay on WJAB cautioned drivers to crush their smokes and then played a record about a man who was going to jump off a water tower for love.

They drove down Route 12 past the Elks sign and were on Jointner Avenue. Ben saw at once that the blinker was dark. No need of a warning light now.

Then they were in town. They drove through it slowly, and Ben felt the old fear drop over him, like a coat found in the attic which has grown tight but still fits. Mark sat rigidly beside him, holding a vial of holy water brought all the way from Los Zapatos. Father Gracon had presented him with it as a going-away present.

With the fear came memories: almost heartbreaking.

They had changed Spencer’s Sundries to a LaVerdiere’s, but it had fared no better. The closed windows were dirty and bare. The Greyhound bus sign was gone. A for-sale sign had fallen askew in the window of the Excellent Café, and all the counter stools had been uprooted and ferried away to some more prosperous lunchroom. Up the street the sign over what had once been a Laundromat still read “Barlow and Straker—Fine Furnishings,” but now the gilt letters were tarnished and they looked out on empty sidewalks. The show window was empty, the deep-pile carpet dirty. Ben thought of Mike Ryerson and wondered if he was still lying in the crate in the back room. The thought made his mouth dry.

Ben slowed at the crossroads. Up the hill he could see the Norton house, the grass grown long and yellow in front and behind it, where Bill Norton’s brick barbecue had stood. Some of the windows were broken.

Further up the street he pulled in to the curb and looked into the park. The War Memorial presided over a junglelike growth of bushes and grass. The wading pool had been choked by summer waterweeds. The green paint on the benches was flaked and peeling. The swing chains had rusted, and to ride in one would produce squealing noises unpleasant enough to spoil the fun. The slippery slide had fallen over and lay with its legs sticking stiffly out, like a dead antelope. And perched in one corner of the sandbox, a floppy arm trailing on the grass, was some child’s forgotten Raggedy Andy doll. Its shoe-button eyes seemed to reflect a black, vapid horror, as if it had seen all the secrets of darkness during its long stay in the sandbox. Perhaps it had.

He looked up and saw the Marsten House, its shutters still closed, looking down on the town with rickety malevolence. It was harmless now, but after dark…?

The rains would have washed away the wafer with which Callahan had sealed it. It could be theirs again if they wanted it, a shrine, a dark lighthouse overlooking this shunned and deadly town. Did they meet up there? he wondered. Did they wander, pallid, through its nighted halls and hold revels, twisted services to the Maker of their Maker?

He looked away, cold.

Mark was looking at the houses. In most of them the shades were drawn; in others, uncovered windows looked in on empty rooms. They were worse than those decently closed, Ben thought. They seemed to look out at these daylight interlopers with the vapid stares of mental defectives.

“They’re in those houses,” Mark said tightly. “Right now, in all those houses. Behind the shades. In beds and closets and cellars. Under the floors. Hiding.”

“Take it easy,” Ben said.

The village dropped behind them. Ben turned onto the Brooks Road and they drove past the Marsten House—its shutters still sagging, its lawn a complex maze of knee-high witch grass and goldenrod.

Mark pointed, and Ben looked. A path had been beaten across the grass, beaten white. It cut across the lawn from the road to the porch. Then it was behind them, and he felt a loosening in his chest. The worst had been faced and was behind them.

Far out on the Burns Road, not too far distant from the Harmony Hill graveyard, Ben stopped the car and they got out. They walked into the woods together. The undergrowth snapped harshly, dryly, under their feet. There was a gin-sharp smell of juniper berries and the sound of late locusts. They came out on a small, knoll-like prominence of land that looked down on a slash through the woods where the Central Maine Power lines twinkled in the day’s cool windiness. Some of the trees were beginning to show color.

“The old-timers say this is where it started,” Ben said. “Back in 1951. The wind was blowing from the west. They think maybe a guy got careless with a cigarette. One little cigarette. It took off across the Marshes and no one could stop it.”

He took a package of Pall Malls from his pocket, looked at the emblem thoughtfully—in hoc signo vinces—and then tore the cellophane top off. He lit one and shook out the match. The cigarette tasted surprisingly good, although he had not smoked in months.

“They have their places,” he said. “But they could lose them. A lot of them could be killed…or destroyed. That’s a better word. But not all of them. Do you understand?”

“Yes,” Mark said.

“They’re not very bright. If they lose their hiding places, they’ll hide badly the second time. A couple of people just looking in obvious places could do well. Maybe it could be finished in ’salem’s Lot by the time the first snow flew. Maybe it would never be finished. No guarantee, one way or the other. But without…something…to drive them out, to upset them, there would be no chance at all.”

“Yes.”

“It would be ugly and dangerous.”

“I know that.”

“But they say fire purifies,” Ben said reflectively. “Purification should count for something, don’t you think?”

“Yes,” Mark said again.

Ben stood up. “We ought to go back.”

He flicked the smoldering cigarette into a pile of dead brush and old brittle leaves. The white ribbon of smoke rose thinly against the green background of junipers for two or three feet, and then was pulled apart by the wind. Twenty feet away, downwind, was a large, jumbled deadfall.

They watched the smoke, transfixed, fascinated.

It thickened. A tongue of flame appeared. A small popping noise issued from the pile of dead brush as twigs caught.

“Tonight they won’t be running sheep or visiting farms,” Ben said softly. “Tonight they’ll be on the run. And tomorrow—”

“You and me,” Mark said, and closed his fist. His face was no longer pale; bright color glowed there. His eyes flashed.

They went back to the road and drove away.

In the small clearing overlooking the power lines, the fire in the brush began to burn more strongly, urged by the autumn wind that blew from the west.


October 1972

June 1975



