
In Chapter 12 (Mark), both Mark and Susan explore the Marsten House, plotting to kill Barlow. However, in the published novel, the house is still a shambles when Susan peers in the window. In the original manuscript, there has been some renovation, detailed below:

She peered in through the break in the shutters. “Wow,” she murmured.

“What is it?” he asked anxiously. Even standing on tiptoe, he wasn’t quite tall enough to peer in.

She tried stumblingly to explain. Of course, neither of them knew that Parker [Larry] Crockett, feeling more and more like a man in the devil’s power, had been acting on Straker’s orders—orders that unvaryingly specified pick-up and delivery after dark. The invoices and bills of lading were always correct to the final letter, and payment was always to be made in cash—and Straker calculated with devilish accuracy, including sums for tipping porters and drivers. Drivers were hard to find, also. The harried Crockett found himself having to cast further and further afield for haulers and he found none that would do the job more than once. Royal Snow had laughed in his face and said, “I wouldn’t go back to that hell-house for a million bucks. Not if you drove the million up to my back door in a pickup. Get someone else.”

The triumph of owning the hot property downstate had even gone a bit sour in his mouth. Looking at the duly-executed papers in his safe-deposit box somehow didn’t compensate for the looks on the country-boys’ faces when they came into his office to collect Straker’s money. Parker knew that some of the deliveries were paintings—even when crated and covered with brown paper, the shape and feel of a painting was unmistakable. He suspected that the other crates, some of them picked up at the Portland docks, some at the Gates Falls railhead, contained furniture.

On Friday evening, the two men Parker had hired from Harlow had not returned—instead, Straker had shown up, driving the U-Haul.

“Where are those two guys?” Parker had asked. “I got their money…” He indicated the sealed white envelopes with a finger that shook slightly. Straker made that happen, damn him. For the first time in his long and not-so-straight business life, Parker Crockett felt manipulated, and he did not like it.

“They were curious,” Straker said, smiling his wolfish smile. “Like Bluebeard’s wife.”

“Where are they?” Parker asked again, aware that he was afraid Straker might tell him the truth.

“I’ve paid them,” Straker said. “You needn’t worry. You can keep that, if you like,” he added carelessly. There was two hundred dollars in each envelope.

Parker said deliberately: “If the State Police or Homer McCaslin shows up here, I want you to know I’m not going to cover up a goddamned thing. You’ve exceeded our agreement.”

Straker had thrown back his head and roared out his humorless, black laughter. “You are a precious man, Mr Crockett. Precious. You needn’t fear the authorities. Indeed, no.” The mockery of humor disappeared from his face like a dream. “If you must fear anything, fear your own curiosity. Do not be like those two dirt-grubbers tonight…or Bluebeard’s wife. There is a saying in our country: he who knows little is a sparrow; and the sparrows abide.”

And Parker Crockett asked no more questions. His daughter was sick in bed, and he asked no questions about that, either.



Looking through those dusty, broken slats was like looking through a science fiction time-lens into some stately Victorian mansion after the family had gone to Brighton for the summer. The walls were covered with a heavy, silken paper, wine-colored. Several wing chairs stood about, and a deep green velour sofa. In the alcove just off the main living room she could see a huge mahogany rolltop desk. Over it, in a heavily-scrolled frame, was a reproduction of Rembrandt’s Boy at his Studies—of course, it had to be a reproduction, didn’t it? Sliding doors, half-open, fronted the hallway that led past the stairwell and down toward the kitchen where Hubert Marsten’s wife had met her end. In the passage’s brown depths, she could see the crystal glimmer of a chandelier.

She stepped away fighting an urge to rub her eyes. It was so unlike the Marsten House of town rumor, or the stories passed from mouth to horrified mouth around the Girl Scout campfires that it was almost indecent. And all the changes had been made invisibly, it seemed.

“What is it?” Mark hissed again. “Is it him?”

“No,” she said. “The house, it…it’s been redone,” she finished lamely.

“Sure,” he said, in perfect understanding. “They like to have all their stuff. Why shouldn’t they? They’ve got tons of money and gold.”



She boosted herself up with a smooth flex of her muscles, and suddenly thought of Ben telling her about the hoods who had stuck up John Stennis: We’re going to shoot you anyway.

She dropped lightly to the carpet, which was smooth and soft and deep. Across the room, a grandfather clock with its wonderfully convoluted works in an oblong glass case, ticked away the minutes. The highly polished pendulum made a sunstreak on the opposing wall. There was an open humidor by one of the wing chairs, and beside it, an old-looking book with a calfskin binding. A black satin bookmark was placed into it perhaps three quarters of the way through. The overhead light fixture was a wonderfully convoluted thing composed of oblique prisms.

There were no mirrors in the room.

“Hey,” Mark hissed. His hands waved above the windowsill. “Help me get up.”

She leaned out, caught him under the armpits, and dragged him up until he could catch a grip on the sill. Then he jackknifed himself in neatly. His sneakered feet thumped to the carpet, and then the house was still again.

They found themselves listening to the silence, fascinated by it. There did not even seem to be the faint, high hum in the ears that comes in utter stillness, the sound of nerve-endings idling in neutral. There was only a great dead soundlessness. And that wasn’t right because—

She looked wildly across the room.

The clock had stopped. The pendulum hung straight down.



The cellar door was standing ajar.

“That’s where we have to go,” he said.

“Oh,” she said weakly. “Oh.”

The door was open just a crack, and the light did not penetrate at all. The tongue of darkness seemed to lick at the kitchen, hungrily, waiting for night to come so it could swallow it whole. That quarter inch of darkness was hideous, unspeakable in its possibilities. She stood beside Mark, helpless and moveless.

Then he moved forward and pulled the door open, and she felt her legs fall in behind him.

His fingers found a light switch and thumbed it back and forth several times.

“Busted,” he muttered. “That’s no surprise.” He reached into his back pocket and brought out a greasy, crooked candle that had been slightly flattened by its trip in Mark’s back pocket. He turned to her and made himself offer: “Look, maybe you better stay up here and keep a watch out for Straker.”

“No,” she said. “I’m coming.”

It did not occur to either of them that the time had come to go back, to get Ben and perhaps even Jimmy Cody, to come back here with powerful eight-cell flashlights and shotguns. They were beyond reality; they had gone around the bend that so many discuss so lightly at parties where the electric lights are on and shadows are kept sensibly under tables and locked in closets.

He lit the candle and they went through the door.

The throat of the stairway was narrow stone, the steps themselves dusty and old. The candle flame danced and fluttered in the noisome exhalation from below.

Now she heard something: the faint whisk and patter of many small feet. She pressed her lips together to still the sound that wanted to come between them—it might have been a scream.

“Rats,” he said. “You scared of rats?”

“No,” she lied.

They went down.

She counted the steps—thirteen of them. Didn’t they say that the old English gallows had thirteen steps? Only of course that was going up, not down.

(Ben had mentioned Psycho; what was that line from the book, not Hitchcock’s movie? You’ve made your grave and now you have to lie in it. Only it wasn’t a grave, it was a bed. Or Poe: My God, I had walled the monster up in the tomb! Or nameless hoodlums on a Washington, D.C. street: We’re going to kill you anyway.)

They stepped on the hard-packed earth floor, and Mark held the candle up. The ceiling was low; the top of Susan’s head nearly brushed the cobwebby beams. In the glow of the candle they could see moving shadows in the darkness, and every now and again the ruby glint of an eye. There was an old table covered by a piece of oilcloth, and beside it stood an opened crate, with aluminum retaining bands snapped. The smell of rot and putridity was thick in the throat, nearly overwhelming.

“Take your cross in your hand,” he said.

She fumbled it out of her blouse and held it tightly. Closed in her fist, it seemed to be the only warmth in a cold world. She began to feel a little better, a little comforted. She looked down at her tightly curled hand and saw a faint, luminous glow escaping between her fingers in rays.

“It’s glowing,” she whispered.

“Yes. We don’t have to worry about the rats. Come on. This way.”

They began to walk forward, single file, toward the long southern spread of the cellar. She could see that it took an L-turn up ahead, and knew that whatever they had come for would reach its culmination beyond that turn. She looked aside and felt her blood cool in her veins.

The rats were everywhere, seemingly millions of them, two and three deep, squirming over each other in their eagerness. She saw some as big as small cats. Their beady eyes stared at them with cold impudence. They had left a small pathway for them, about two feet across, and were closing in behind them as the Red Sea had closed behind Moses.

One of them darted forward and nipped at Mark’s foot and without thought she thrust her crucifix at it, hissing. The rat squealed and scrabbled off into the darkness, a brown elastic sock fiber hanging from its jaw.

They stopped at the cellar’s elbow-bend. “Remember,” he told her. “Don’t look at his eyes. No matter what happens.”

“Yes…all right.”

He took her hand again. “I’m scared,” he said. “I couldn’t ever do this again.”

“It’s too late to go back, isn’t it?”

“Yes. I…I think it is.”

“Then go on, Mark. We’ll do what we have to.” She was stunned by the calmness which seemed to flow from her own voice.

They were around the corner, and a warm carrion breeze immediately whiffed out the candle, plunging them into utter, womblike darkness. She screamed; was unable to help it. In her ears was the sound of the rats, squeaking and rustling and drawing closer with tenebrous eagerness.

“Hold your cross up!” Mark shouted.

She did.

Its glow spilled forth with an effulgent, unearthly radiance that was brighter by far than the candle that now lay at Mark’s feet. It spilled off these crumbled brick walls with a frosty luminescence which was deeply comforting. The rats squealed and scampered.

Mark, also holding up his cross, was looking around. “Judas Priest!” he muttered.

Hubert Marsten must have been a bootlegger indeed, Susan thought. They stood at the mouth of what must once have been an extensive wine cellar (Poe again: For the love of God, Montressor—!), full of casks covered with dust and cobwebs, and lined with crisscrossing wine holders. From some of these, ancient magnums still peeked forth. Some of them had popped their corks, and where sparkling burgundy had once waited for some discerning palate, the spider now made his home. Others would have turned to vinegar. Still others might be good, still waiting…waiting for…

She shifted her eyes up. The wine cellar opened out to an underground dais, freshly hung with circular velvet drapes. Unlit black tapers stood about. On the far wall, a cross with broken arms hung upside down. Obscene statues stood to either side of the main podium—and on it rested a huge coffin of banded oak, and on top of it was an embossed coat of arms with a wolf rampant, and one word:

SARLINOV.

This was it, then. True—all true. The word echoed dismally into the depths of her mind, as if through channels of fog. She felt waves of faintness sweep over her, and her cross wavered. She felt frozen in indecision, unable to move. It would be so much simpler, so blessed, to just wait here…wait here until the world turned into his nighted sphere above them.

“Now!” Mark shouted at her. “Now!”

“No,” she whispered weakly. “I can’t. Let me alone.” The scene wavered and danced in front of her eyes, as if seen from behind a burning haze of heat. The statues which flanked the coffin, statues she faintly recognized as the Holy Family in unthinkable postures, seemed to writhe and move.

“Our Father, who art in Heaven…” he began.

“No…no…”

His hand flashed out, and her head rocked back. One eye watered and twitched.


This section is from Father Callahan’s chapter, when he is talking to Matt Burke. This scene was omitted from the final novel but still carries peripheral interest.

“I’m not going to say no, not at this point,” Callahan said. “But I want you to understand my position. Let me make three points, and then I’ll ask you if you have changed your mind. Agreed?”

“Yes.”

“Okay. One: During the black plague which covered Europe during the Middle Ages, vampire hysteria was roughly equal to the flying saucer hysteria of a few years ago in this country. People in many cases observed the unquiet dead writhing on the carts of the dead-wagons that went through the streets, collecting plague victims, and in many cases, a traveler passing a cemetery would see a hand clawing up through the earth, followed by the mud-clotted, wild-eyed face of what the illiterate, frightened ‘man-in-the-street’ of the day quite reasonably took to be an Undead. In the countries of Eastern Europe, the peasants recently converted to Catholicism besieged their priests, begging them to do something about the vampires that were abroad in the countryside. Most priests had never heard of such a thing, but were loath to admit it. Many of them, therefore, blessed the rite of vampire-killing forthwith. Are you following?”

“Yes.”

“Good. Then imagine you are Joe Smithov, a typical Romanian peasant. You are stricken with the black plague, and for two weeks you thrash in a delirium of fever. At last it breaks, and you plunge down into a cooling, restorative unconsciousness. At this point you are pronounced dead by an unlettered country quack who held a mirror in front of your mouth for four seconds and then felt for your pulse by pressing his ear to your stomach. Still unconscious, you are piled into a rude coffin by frightened relatives, and carried to the local graveyard, where you are buried in a shallow pit. Later, you awake to the horror of all horrors: buried alive! Perhaps you scream. Perhaps you are able to pull away one of the boards and thrust an arm up through the loose earth, waving wildly. And then…blessed rescue! You hear the shovels, then see the good light of day again. Instead of stale air, the fresh, sweet breeze of God’s heaven. And then…what’s this? A delegation with an ash stake, tied with ceremonial red ribbons. Two men hold you down, screaming and begging. A third places the stake against your chest. A fourth holds a mallet, ready to send your blood-sucking soul back to Father Satan. And behind this delegation, who should you see with your dying gaze but the village priest, reading the rite of exorcism and sprinkling everything in sight with holy water! Fade out. Not pretty, is it?”

“No.”

“The church is desperately ashamed of the whole episode—they use it as a case in point whenever someone in its body shows a sign of jumping to conclusions—of proceeding on the basis of two hundred years’ study rather than five hundred.”


In the scene when Ben, Mark, Cody and Callahan come into the Marsten House cellar, they are greeted with a tape recording of Barlow’s voice, rather than the handwritten note that is in the finished novel.

When the priest opened the door, Mark felt the rank, rotten odor assail his nostrils again—but that, also, was different. Not so strong. Less…less malevolent.

The priest started down the stairs, and his cross did not glow as theirs had done the day before. Still, it took all his willpower to continue down after them into that pit of horror.

Jimmy had produced a flashlight from his bag and clicked it on. The beam illuminated again the old table, the dusty, monolithic coal furnace with its many projecting pipes like tentacles, the overturned crate. Yet there was no squirming tide of rats, no ominous sensation of moving to meet a dark force of illimitable power and cold hate. And somehow that frightened him more than anything else, although he could not have told why.

“Around the corner,” he said, his voice flat and dead in the enclosed space.

Holding the crucifix high, Callahan advanced. And now, at last, the crucifix he held aloft began to glow belatedly. As he turned the corner, he thundered: “In the name of God the Father—” His words clogged suddenly in his throat, and a huge, monstrous chuckle smote their ears.

Mark screamed: “It’s him, it’s him!”

“A recording!” Callahan shouted. “Some kind of tape! I felt a wire across my chest—”

“Hello, my young friends!” the voice boomed. It was gentle, mocking, jeering. “How lovely of you to have dropped in.”

Ben darted forward, ignoring the coldness which rose in him at that reptilian voice. He swept his hands in the empty air, found a length of something very like piano wire, and followed it on a diagonal from the corner.

“I am never averse to company—it has always been one of my great joys,” the voice continued, booming hollowly in the dark and rank smelling cellar. “Had you come in the evening, I should have welcomed you in person…however, since I suspected you might come in daylight, I thought it might be best to be out.” The chuckle again, booming and racketing, heart-freezing. It struck a familiar cord in Jimmy Cody, and he isolated it. As a young boy, crouching in front of a very large Zenith radio in his father’s house, he had heard a chuckle much like that echo from the vocal cords of the Shadow.

Ben found the tape recorder, sitting on a high shelf to the left of the wine cellar’s entrance. It was a modern Wollensak reel-to-reel, the piano wire tightly snubbed around the spring-loaded PLAY/RECORD button.

“I have left you a token of my appreciation,” the voice continued, becoming soft and caressing. “Someone very near and dear to one of you is now in the place where I occupied my days until yesterday…you are there, aren’t you, Mr Mears?”

Ben jumped and regarded the tape recorder as if it were a snake that had just bitten him.

“I do not need her,” the voice said with frightening indifference. “I have left her for you to—how is the idiom?—to warm up for the main event. To whet your appetite, if you like. Let us see how well you like the appetizer to the main course you contemplate.”

“Turn it off!” Jimmy cried.

“No!” Ben shouted. “He may say something about—”

“—want to say something special to one of you,” the voice continued, and it had become silky with menace. “Young Master Petrie.”

Mark stiffened.

“Master Petrie, in some way unknown to me, you have robbed me of the most faithful and resourceful servant I have ever known—and that covers a long, long period of time. How dare you?” the voice asked, rage creeping in. “Did you sneak up behind him and push him? You cowardly little whelp, how dare you?”

Mark bared his teeth unconsciously at the voice. His hands had doubled up into fists.

“I am going to enjoy dealing with you,” the voice continued, still rising. “Your parents first, I think. Tonight…or tomorrow night…or the next. And then you. But you shall enter my church as a choirboy castratum. I take the blood not from your neck, but from your very manhood: the testicles. I send you into the outer darknesses of my service unshod, eh? Eh?” The voice pealed off into laughter, but even to Father Callahan’s ear, frozen with wonder and fear, the laughter sounded false, brassy with rage…and uncertainty. What a turn it must have given him to rise on Sunday evening and find his right arm had been cut off!

“Father Callahan?” the voice asked teasingly, and he jumped as Ben had a moment earlier. “Are you there? Pardonez-moi, I cannot see you. Have they persuaded you to come? Perhaps so. I have observed you at some length since I arrived in Momson…much as a good chess player will study the games of his opposition, eh? The Catholic Church is not yet the oldest of my adversaries, no! I was old even when it was young, this claque which you and your fellows venerate so for its antiquity. This simpering club of bread-eaters and wine-drinkers who venerate the sheep-savior. Yet I do not underestimate. I am wise in the ways of goodness as well as evil. I am not jaded. Even now I love the game as well as the prize, so I do not underestimate.

“So how do I see you? Better, perhaps, than you see yourself. Braver. How is your word? Courage? No. Spanish is machismo. Much-man. More than courage. Thinking, also. Coolness. When coupled with white magic, that is much. These others…fut, I spit on them. When I am ready, I will take them one by one and break them. It is only you I fear, coupled to your Church. How is this, that I feel fear? It is also machismo. You yourself fear, even now when it is not me but only my voice in this box, is it not so?”

Yes, Callahan thought. Yes, yes. I know fear. So much that it seems like the first ever in my life.

“It is wise to fear one’s opponent,” the bodiless voice comforted him. “This is how we live in the world.

“Yet I will best you,” the voice added, almost as an afterthought. “How? you say. Do I not bear the symbol of White? Can I not move in the day as well as the night? Are there not charms and potions, both Christian and pagan, which my so-good friend Matthew Burke has informed me of? Yes, yes, and yes. But I have lived longer than you. I am crafty. I am not the serpent, but the father of serpents.

“Still, you say, this is not enough. And it is not. In the end, it is your own wretched faith that will undo you. It is weak…soft…rotten. It is no longer a defense against the evils that are in your world, if it ever was. You yourself, acolyte and preserver of the flame, doubt the worth of the flame that you guard. You preach of love and there is no love. I spit on love!” He cried it, his voice rising in a sudden and wrenching flight that held notes of madness. “Love, the talisman of White! What is it? Words and pressings of flesh and barnyard copulation! The rest is mere presumption! It has failed!” And now that voice, as resourceful as a cathedral organ, had taken on accents of triumph, and it was impossible to tell if they were real or counterfeit.

“Always you assume good is greater than evil, but it is not so. Goodness, dear Father Callahan, requires the act of faith. Evil requires only that one wait. It is loose in the world, as omnipresent as the wind. You know that, but you do not know of good. And when the moment comes, it will be check to the king…and black wins all!”

The voice rose to a scream that made them all flinch, and then the voice was silent. The tape spooled on vacantly for a sheaf of moments, and then another voice spoke—Susan’s voice. The cool, clear accents were the same, complete to the faint Maine accent of slurred r’s. Yet for all that, it was a travesty, a husk, a bad imitation, a talking doll speaking in Susan’s voice.

“Come to me, Ben. Let me fuck you. Wait until dark and I’ll fuck you. Fuck-fuck-fuck. Father Callahan, too. Would you like a piece of it, Father? Let me slip my hand under that black robe and start to—”

Ben pulled the tape recorder off the shelf, barely aware that he was screaming. Something inside it popped and flared and the words ran down to a grotesquely deepening basso, and still he didn’t, couldn’t stop. He kicked it, sending one of the reels flying, unreeling tape. He chased it, kicked it again, chased it, kicked it again, chased it—

Hands on his shoulders, shaking him. “Ben, stop it! Stop it! Stop it!”

He glanced up, dazed. Jimmy’s face in front of his, contorted. Weeping?

“I’m sorry,” he said, his voice dull and distant in his own ears. “Sorry.”

He looked around. Mark, his fists still balled, his mouth frozen in the twist of someone who has bitten something rotten; Jimmy, his oddly boyish face streaked with sweat and tears; Father Donald Callahan, his face pallid and drawn into an agonized rictus. And they were all looking at him.


Later, when Barlow has Callahan cornered in the Petrie kitchen, the published novel takes a different turn; the original plays out below.

The cross’s glow was dying.

He looked at it, eyes widening. Fear leaped into his belly like a confusion of hot wires. His head jerked up and he stared at Sarlinov. He was coming forward, his smile wide, almost voluptuous.

“Stay back,” Callahan said hoarsely, retreating a step. “I command it, in the name of God.”

Sarlinov laughed at him.

The glow in the cross was only a thin and guttering light in a cruciform shape. The shadows had crept across the vampire’s face again, masking his features in strangely barbaric lines and triangles under the sharp cheekbones.

Callahan took another step backward, and his buttocks bumped the kitchen table, which was set against the wall.

“Nowhere left to go,” Sarlinov murmured sadly, but his dark eyes bubbled with infernal mirth. “Sad to see a man’s faith fail. Ah, well…”

The cross trembled in his hand and suddenly all its light was gone. It was only a piece of plaster that his mother had bought in a Dublin souvenir shop, probably at a scalper’s price. The power it had sent ramming up his arm, enough power, seemingly, to smash down walls and shatter stones, was gone. The muscles remembered the thrumming but could not duplicate it.

Sarlinov’s voice came out of the dark—Callahan shifted his eyes with frenzied futility to locate its position exactly and couldn’t. Sarlinov was toying with him now, playing cat-and-mouse.

Can he hear my heart beating? Callahan wondered. Like a rabbit, caught in a trap? I pray to God not.

“It is the malaise of you Americans,” Sarlinov’s voice said from a new place. “You believe in toothpastes and the spray for armpits and for wonderful pills, but you do not believe in Powers. Instead, you have grown rich on darkness, like a fat pig that has grown fat on garbage. It is ripe, swelled, ready to be bled.”

God, Callahan thought, I’m begging, pleading, for You to get me out of this. Not for myself but for…for…

Yet there was no intensity to his thoughts, none of the feeling of transmitting that had come to him as a young man; no feeling that the words were going further than the cage of his skull.

Something clattered to the floor.

The cross.

“Ah, you’ve dropped it,” Sarlinov said, and now he was far to the right of where Callahan had expected him, nearly behind him. “But it doesn’t matter; you’ve forgotten the doctrine of your own church, is it not so? The cross…or the flag…or the bread and wine…others…only symbols. Without faith, the cross is only wood, the flag cloth, the bread baked wheat, the wine sour grapes. Is it not so? If you had dropped it before, you should have beaten me yet another night. I rather suspected you would. In a way, I had hoped it might be so. It has been long since I met an opponent of any real worth.”

Another silence, dreadful. There was no sound of movement, none. The vampire was more silent than a cat in its deadly stalk.

Callahan suddenly began to grope on the table, running his hands lightly across its surface, his fingers trying to remember where it was, the knife Mrs Petrie had used to cut the sandwiches.

He remembered Matt saying, Some things are worse than death.

His fingertips read breadcrumbs like braille, slid over a plate, touched the rim of a coffee cup. Where was it? Where? For the love of God!

And as he touched it and his fingers closed around the wooden handle, Sarlinov spoke again, almost at his elbow.

“But there must be an end to talking now,” Sarlinov said with real regret. “There must be—”

“In God’s name!” Callahan cried, and swung the knife in a great, rising arc.

Light suddenly streamed from the blade in bright effulgence. Sarlinov’s words were broken off into a jagged scream, and for one split second, Callahan could see the blazing knife-blade mirrored in each of his nighted eyes.

The blade grazed his forehead, and blood streamed forth in a welling stream.

“It’s too late, shaman!” Sarlinov snarled. “You pay a thousand times for your flawed belief, and for daring to cut me—”

And with no thought (he was, after all, a thinking man), Callahan plunged the knife into his own chest, not feeling it, seeing the impotent fury in the thing’s eyes—but it dared not come near.

He withdrew the blade, and plunged it in again, with all that remained of his flagging strength. As thought began to ebb, he realized that his faith—some of it—had come back and he might have cheated himself of victory in his final, instinctive effort to save his soul from the hell of the Undead; and that was the most serious denial of faith of all.

Then thought was gone and he fell forward on the haft of the knife and he closed his eyes and let himself go off to see what gods there were.


This scene occurs when Jimmy and Ben are driving back into Momson.

As they drew closer to Momson, an almost palpable cloud formed just above their heads, like the ones that used to form over the heads of Huey, Dewie, and Louie in the old Donald Duck comic books when they were angry. When Jimmy pulled off the turnpike at the large green reflectorized sign that read ROUTE 12 MOMSON CUMBERLAND CUMBERLAND CTR Ben reflected that this was the way he and Susan had come home after their first date—she had wanted to see something with a car chase in it—and he had told her about the childhood experience that had finally gotten him pregnant with book. That book seemed very pale now.

“It’s gone bad,” Jimmy said. His boyish face looked pale and frightened and angry. “Christ, you can almost smell it.”

And you could, although the smell was mental rather than physical; a psychic whiff of tombs.

Route 12 was nearly deserted. On the way in, they passed Win Purinton’s milk truck, and he lifted his hand in a puzzled, bemused kind of wave. They passed a few fast-moving cars going the other way, obviously transients. The houses on outer Momson Avenue had a deserted, shut-up look.

As they entered town, Jimmy said in an almost absurdly relieved tone: “Look there. Crossen’s is open.”

It was. Milt was out front, gassing up a car with a New Hampshire license plate, and Grover Verrill was standing next to him, dressed in a yellow lobsterman’s slicker.

“Don’t see the rest of the crew, though,” Jimmy added.

Milt glanced up at them and waved, and Ben thought he saw lines of strain on both old men’s faces. The CLOSED sign was still posted inside the door of Foreman’s Mortuary. The hardware store was also closed. The diner was open, however; as they flashed by, Ben caught a glimpse of Pauline Dickens serving someone coffee. The rest of the place looked empty.

The local police car was pulled up by the Municipal Building and Parkins Gillespie, also in a slicker, was standing beside it. He did not wave, but watched them go by with hooded eyes.

The downtown streets were empty—not unusual in itself; it was a small town, and it was raining—but many shades were drawn, giving the town a brooding, secret look.

“They’ve been at it, all right,” Ben said.


Later, they enter the Petrie house and encounter the remains of Callahan.

“Good dear Christ,” Jimmy whispered. His arms turned to water; the bats went crashing over the floor like swollen pick-up sticks.

Ben only stared, frozen.

The bodies of Mr and Mrs Petrie lay where they had fallen, undisturbed. But Sarlinov had vented his full fury on Callahan, who had branded him and then cheated him at the moment of his victory.

His headless corpse was nailed to the dining room door, in a hideous parody of the crucifixion.

Ben closed his eyes, tried to swallow, and found nothing to swallow on. His mouth was like glass. Think of it as a cut of meat at the delicatessen, he told himself sickly. Think of it as—

He dropped his own armload and ran for the sink.

Faintly, he heard Jimmy cry out in a choked voice: “What kind of a man is he?”

Ben raised himself on trembling arms and ran water into the sink. As if from a great distance, he heard his voice say: “Not a man at all.”

The truth of it finally struck home to both of them, with a great and iron weight, like the slamming of a huge door.


When Jimmy and Mark begin working on taking care of the vampires, they manage more than pulling Roy McDougall out into the sun, as this section shows:

Roy McDougall’s car was standing in the driveway of the trailer lot on the Bend Road, and seeing it there on a weekday made Jimmy suspect the worst.

He and Mark got out into the rain without a word. Jimmy took his black bag, and Mark brought several of the freshly sharpened stakes and a hammer with a two-pound head from the trunk. Jimmy mounted the rickety steps and tried the bell. It didn’t work, and so he knocked instead. The pounding roused no one, either in the McDougall trailer or in the neighboring one twenty yards down—although there was a car in that yard, also.

Jimmy tried the storm door, and it was locked. “Give me that hammer,” he said.

Mark handed it over, and Jimmy smashed the glass to the right of the knob, whacking it out with two solid blows. He reached through and unsnapped the catch. The inside door was unlocked. They went in.

The smell was definable instantly—a dead giveaway. Jimmy felt his nostrils cringe against it, to try (unsuccessfully) to shut it out. The smell was not as strong as it had been in the basement of the Marsten House, but it was just as basically offensive—the smell of rot, of deadness. A wet, putrefied smell. Jimmy found himself suddenly remembering when, as boys, he and his buddies had gone out on their bikes during spring vacation to pick up the returnable beer and soft drink bottles the retreating snow had uncovered. In one of these (an Orange Crush bottle) he saw a small, decayed field mouse which had been attracted by the sweetness, perhaps, and had then been unable to get out. He had gotten a whiff of it and had immediately turned away and thrown up. This smell was plangently like that—sickish sweet and decayed sour mixed together and fermenting wildly. He felt his gorge rise.

“They’re here,” Mark said.

They went through the place methodically—kitchen, dining nook, living room, each bedroom. They opened closets as they went. Jimmy thought they had found something in the master bedroom closet, but it was only a heap of dirty clothes.

“No cellar?” Mark asked.

“No…but there might be a crawl space.”

They went around the back and saw the small door that swung inward set into the trailer’s rudimentary foundation. It was fastened with a padlock. Jimmy knocked it off with five hard blows from the hammer, and when he pushed open the half-trap, the smell hit them in a wave of corruption.

“There they are,” Mark said.

Peering in, Jimmy could just see three sets of feet, like corpses lined up on a battlefield. One set wore work boots, one wore knitted slippers, and the third set—tiny feet indeed—were bare.

Family scene, he thought crazily. Norman Rockwell, where are you? Unreality washed over him. The baby, he thought. How am I supposed to do this to a little baby? Matt would do it. I’m not Matt. I’m a doctor. I’m supposed to be a healer, not a…You are healing. You’re giving them back their souls so they can leave whatever awful place they’re in.

“I’m smaller,” Mark said. “I’ll go in.”

He dropped to his knees and wriggled through the half-trap.

“Get the…the little one first,” Jimmy heard himself saying. “Let’s get that over with.”

Mark grabbed Randy McDougall’s ankles and pulled him out.

He was naked and dirty, his small body scratched and the knees lacerated to the point of horror. God knows where the fever in his body had caused him to crawl on them. As soon as the daylight struck his body, his eyelids fluttered and he began to writhe.

Mark gave him a last convulsive jerk out of the half-trap and then stood away, his face a writhing mask of revulsion and grim vengeance.

The baby writhed on the drifts of wet leaves like a fish hooked and pulled up on the bank. Tiny mewling noises escaped its throat as the light burned it. Inside the crawl space, his mother stirred and moaned and made an inarticulate cry. Her feet and hands were twitching, Jimmy saw, as if an electric current had been passed through them.

Randy screamed, lips peeling back over baby teeth that had suddenly developed into puppy fangs, sharp enough to rip skin.

“Hold him,” he said to Mark.

Mark hesitated for a moment. The thought of touching the thing they had dragged out of the darkness showed on his face. Then he dropped to his knees and pinned the arms.

Jimmy had taken his stethoscope, and now he put the earpieces in place, and he applied the pick-up to that twisting chest. Randy’s small head lashed from side to side, gnashing at the air. His eyelids twitched with the roll of the eyes in their sockets.

No heartbeat.

“In the name of God,” Jimmy said, and brought the stake down with both hands in a hard, sweeping curve.

It was very quick.

The body jerked upward, the eyelids flew open, and then the body settled back tiredly and was still. Only a dead little boy remained in front of them…but one that had been dead for a week, and unembalmed. The body swelled in front of them, and suddenly a ghastly, noxious burp escaped the mouth, and they both turned away from it. The cheeks sagged, and the eyes fell inward.

Mark gave a horrified little cry and turned away, but Jimmy felt comforted. He had seen this: it was a normal (although accelerated) process—decay. Nature reclaiming her component parts. Full circle. Something inside him loosened, and he could believe that, even if they were not doing God’s work, that they were doing nature’s.

“Are you all right?” he asked Mark. “Can you keep going?”

“Yes.” He turned and looked at Jimmy with wan, horrified eyes. “It’s not like the movies, is it?”

“No.”

He glanced down at the small corpse. It had caught up with itself, and was finished. The blood which had gushed from around the stake had clotted, then powdered. The entry wound itself looked shriveled and old. He touched the stake and it wiggled easily, with none of the tension he would have found in, say, the handle of a knife planted in a new corpse. The tissues had relaxed like old rubber bands.

He looked at Mark and said: “Poor kid. He’s not pretty, but this is the way he should be. This is right.”

Mark nodded. “Yes. I know that. It’s only hard for a minute.” He looked at the other two, in their pitiful mock-grave. “How are we going to handle them? If they thrash, I can’t hold them.”

“I will, if you can drive the stake. Can you do that?”

“Yes.”

Jimmy crawled in, holding his breath against the stench, and pulled out Sandy McDougall. Mark used the hammer quickly and mercifully. Roy McDougall was more difficult. He had been a strong man, in the prime of his life, and his thrashings and buckings were like a maddened horse. The predatory lungings of his bared teeth were frightening. A square strike on the wrist could sever the hand completely. Mark made two false starts; one nick in the shoulder and one stroke that dug a shallow channel across McDougall’s rib cage. Both of them unleashed freshets of blood, and his screams attained a horrible, foghorn quality that unnerved Jimmy almost totally.

In panicky desperation, Jimmy threw himself across Roy McDougall’s stomach and thighs and yelled: “Quick! Hit him now!”

Mark brought the stake down and smashed it into the flesh with one heavy blow from the hammer. For a moment McDougall’s thrashings intensified, tossing Jimmy off as if he were a piece of chaff, and then he trembled all over and lay still. One of his hands closed tightly, clutching a useless fistful of leaves, and they both watched it, fascinated, until it loosened.

“Let’s drag them back inside there,” Jimmy said.

“Shouldn’t we take them to the river—?”

“We’ll leave the stakes in them. I think that will do it; they’re only Undead, and their hearts are destroyed. And if we have to take time to do that with each of them, we’ll never get done.”

They dragged them back into the crawl space, and Jimmy drove a strong twig through the hasp of the broken lock to hold it shut.

They stood in the rain again, soaked and bloody. “We’ll have to get rid of the bodies eventually,” Jimmy said. “I’m not going to jail for this if I can help it.”

“The next trailer?” Mark asked.

“Yes. They would be the logical ones for the McDougalls to attack first.”

They went across, and this time their nostrils picked up the telltale odor of rot even in the dooryard. Not even the steady autumn rain could lay it.

The name below the doorbell was Evans. Jimmy nodded. Yes, the husband’s name was David Evans. He worked in the auto department of Grant’s in Gates Falls. He had treated him a couple years ago. A cyst, or something.

This time the bell worked, but there was no response. They found Mrs Evans in bed, white and still, and dispatched her. The white sheets were drenched. The two children were in a single bedroom, both dressed in pajamas. Jimmy used his stethoscope and found nothing. The stakes did their work, and now he found using them little different from using a scalpel or a bone-saw. Even horror had its limits.

Mark found David Evans, hidden away in the unfinished storage space over their small garage. He was dressed in neat mechanic’s greens and his mouth was crusted with blood that had dried in two streams from the corners of his mouth. Perhaps his children’s blood.

“Let’s put them all up here,” Jimmy said.

They did, checking the road carefully for cars before carrying each sheet-wrapped body across the space between the house and garage. When the town hall noon whistle went off, sending its shriek up to the gray, membranous sky, they both jumped and then looked at each other sheepishly.

Mark looked at his red-gloved hands with loathing. “Can we use the shower?” he asked Jimmy. “I feel…you know…”

“Yes,” Jimmy said. “I want to call Ben, anyway. We—” He snapped his fingers. “The phone’s out at your house. Christ, why didn’t I think of that? As soon as we clean up, we’d better go back.”

They went inside, and Jimmy sat down in one of the living room chairs and closed his eyes. Soon he heard Mark running water in the bathroom.

On the darkened screen of his eyes he saw Randy McDougall twisting and writhing on the wet leaves, saw the stake falling, saw his stomach swell with gas—

He opened his eyes.

This trailer was in nicer condition than the McDougalls’, neater. He had never known Mrs Evans, but it seemed she must have taken pride in her home. There was a neat pile of the dead children’s toys in a small storage room, a room that had probably been called the laundry room in the mobile home dealer’s original brochure. Poor kids, he hoped they’d enjoyed the toys while there had still been bright days and sunshine to enjoy them in, before they arrived at their final quarters—the shoddy upstairs of a half-finished second-story garage. There was a tricycle, several large trucks and a play gas station, one of those caterpillars on wheels (there must have been some dandy fights over that!), a toy pool table—

Blue chalk.

Three shaded lights in a row.

Men walking around the green table under the bright lights, cueing up, brushing the grains of blue chalk off their fingertips—

“That’s it!” he shouted, sitting bolt upright in the chair, and Mark came running, half undressed for the shower, to see what the matter was.


In this section, Jimmy enters Eva’s basement to confirm that Barlow is hiding there. In the novel, he opens the cellar door and steps down, and, as the published text says, “the screams began.” In the original manuscript, this part is exactly the same, but the reason the screams begin is completely different:

Jimmy told himself he would only go to the foot of the stairs; he could use his lighter and see if the pool table was still there. He went down slowly, using the railing, breathing through his mouth to cut the smell. At the bottom, he flicked the wheel of the Zippo and the lighter flamed. He saw the pool table.

And he saw the rats.

The cellar was full of them. Every inch of floor space and shelf space was covered by the squirming bodies. They had tumbled whole rows of Eva’s carefully-made preserves on the floor and they had smashed, leaving rich, splattered deposits of food. They were not eating now; they had been waiting for him…or for someone. Sarlinov’s daytime guards. And at the flash of light, they attacked, wave after wave of them.

He screamed a warning to Mark and then turned to go back up the steps. A half-dozen huge dump rats that had been crouched on the small utility shelf hung over the steps threw themselves at his face, biting and clawing for purchase. He dropped the lighter and screamed again, this time not in warning but in pain and terror.

Rats crawled across his shoes and swarmed up his legs toward his waist, their sharp teeth and claws sinking through the cloth of his trousers and into flesh.

He staggered up two steps, beating at them with his hands. One of them snuffled through his hair and peered over Jimmy’s forehead and into his eyes; the nose wriggled, and the rodent teeth flashed as he slashed at Jimmy’s eyes.

Jimmy felt a great, flaring pain. He struck the rat away. His right foot slipped through the hole between two of the unbacked stairs and he fell forward, sealing his doom. Pain bloomed and he heard the muffled snap as his right ankle twisted, then broke.

I’ve had it, he thought. But like this…oh, God!

“Mark, run!” he screamed. “Get Ben! Get—”

A rat squirmed into his mouth, back feet digging at his chin. He bit at it, tore at it, and the rat squealed and writhed. The fetid taste of it filled his mouth. He ripped it away, beat more of them off, and began to crawl up the stairs.



Mark went to the door and saw something coming painfully up the steps on its hands and knees. It was brown and writhing with feet and tails and eyes. He saw a flash of something that looked like Jimmy’s shirt.

He went down two steps and held out his hand. A rat jumped on it and crawled up his arm like lightning, black eyes glaring. He struck it off.

The brown, writhing thing heaved itself to its feet and Mark screamed and put his hands to his temples. Jimmy Cody’s face was shredding before his eyes. One eye socket was dark and lightless; a rat was spread-eagled across his left cheek, chewing at his ear. They were crawling in and out of his shirt and now two brown rivers of them were moving up to where Mark stood. In a moment they would be on him.

“Get Ben!” the brown, writhing thing that had been James Cody, M.D., screamed. “Run! Run! R—”

He swayed, threw out his arms, and fell backward into the stairwell with a final, despairing scream.

The rats that had been coming for Mark paused and looked around, sitting up on their haunches and looking down, their paws held out in front of them—as if in applause.

Mark hesitated just a moment, swaying, unable to look away.

The thing that had fallen at the foot of the stairs twisted, writhed, screamed, tried to rise again, fell back, was dreadfully silent.

He could hear cloth being ripped and torn.

The rats began scurrying up toward him, their bodies plump and horribly well-fed. Not dump rats any longer. Graveyard rats.

When the first one reached him, he kicked out, smashing its head, sending it flying. Then he turned, walked up the two steps to the kitchen, and closed the door firmly.


In this scene, Ben and Mark have to chase away the rats before getting Barlow; flit guns and jugs of holy water help them.

They walked slowly through the hissing rain toward the porch. Rats carpeted the steps. They squeaked and thumped on the boards. A line of them were perched up on the red porch railings, like spectators at a racetrack.

“Be gone in the name of God,” Ben said conversationally, and pumped the handle of the flit gun. A thin spray, nearly invisible in the rain, clouded toward the rats on the steps. The effect was immediate and amazing. The rats squealed and writhed and scampered upward, some of them twisting and biting at their own flanks, as if suddenly infested with hungry fleas.

“It works,” he said. “Go back and get one stake and the hammer.”

Mark ran back to the car. Ben started up the porch steps. After two more squirts, all the rats broke ranks and fled. Some jumped over the railing and were gone; most streamed back inside.

Mark ran up the steps to where Ben stood. He had unbuttoned his shirt and tucked the stake and the hammer inside, against his skin. His face was pallid, and a hectic blotch of red stood out on each cheek like a fever-sign.

The kitchen was overrun with them. They crawled across Eva Miller’s neat red-and-white checked oilcloth with their tails dragging; sat upon the shelves, hissing and squeaking; scampered across the burners of the big electric stove. The sink was full of them, a writhing, twisting mass.

“They’re—” Ben began, and a rat leaped onto his head, twisting and biting. He staggered, and all the rats surged forward eagerly.

Mark screamed and pumped his flit-gun at Ben’s head. The aerosolsized drops of water were cool and soothing; the rat fell, twisting, to the floor and ran off, squealing.

“I’m so scared,” Mark said, shuddering.

“You better be. Where’s that flashlight?”

“At the…bottom of the cellar stairs. I dropped it when Jimmy…”

“Okay.” They stood at the mouth of the cellar. A steady, eager rustling noise came up from the darkness below, and a tenebrous squeaking and squealing, as if from the throat of a catacomb.

“Oh Ben, do we have to?” the boy groaned.

Ben said: “Did Christ have to walk to Calvary?”

They started down.



Ben thought: I’m going to my death. The thought came easily and naturally, and there was no regret in it. Any fine emotion such as regret was buried beneath a vast white glacier of fear. He had felt like this once before, when he and a friend had split a tab of acid. You entered a strange jungle world where you suddenly found you did not want to go; a jungle inhabited by exotic beasts. You were no longer in control of you, not for a while. The colors and sounds and images formed whether you wanted them to or not. Filled with an alien presence, you were driven on wings of fear, higher and higher, willy-nilly, never knowing when the overwhelming question might be presented to you for half-mad inspection.

Let be be the finale of seem. The only emperor is the emperor of ice cream. Who said that? Matt? When? Matt was dead. Wallace Stevens was dead. Susan was dead. Miranda was dead. I wouldn’t look at that, if I were you. The driver of the truck that had squashed Miranda’s head to a bloody pumpkin had said that. Perhaps he was dead, too. And he might be dead soon himself. And the might part of it seemed very weak indeed. Again he thought: I’m going to my death.

They reached the bottom, and the rats closed in. They stood back to back, working the flit guns. The rats drew back, then broke in confusion. Ben saw the flashlight and picked it up. The glass lens had cracked, but the bulb was intact. He turned it on and flashed it around. It caught the pool table first, mummified in plastic, and then a dark, huddled shape lying on the concrete floor in a puddle of something that might have been oil.

“Stay here,” he said, and walked carefully over and flashed a light down on what remained of Jimmy Cody after a thousand rats had finished with him.

I wouldn’t look at that, if I were you.

“Oh, Jimmy,” he tried to say, and the words broke open and bled in his throat.

There was a neatly folded stack of living room drapes on a corner shelf. He took one of them and threw it over Jimmy’s body. Dark flowers blossomed on it.

The rats were creeping in again. He sprayed them wildly, running at them, and they squealed and fled from him.

“Don’t do that!” Mark called, frightened. “Half of it’s gone already!”

Ben stopped, trembling. He flashed the light around; nothing. He shone it under the pool table. Bare. No room behind the furnace.

“Where is he?” he muttered.

Shelves, preserves smashed on the floor, a Welsh dresser against the far wall—

He swung the flashlight back and focused on it.

The rats had retreated to their thickest concentration there; they crawled over it and around it in profusion, their small buckshot eyes casting back the light with a reddish sheen.

“That wasn’t here before,” he said. “Let’s move it.”

They walked across to it, and this time it took both of them spraying before the rats split their ranks and moved away in two wings. Yet they would not go far, although several of them had gone into twisting, snarling convulsions from the spray that had fallen on them. The stairs leading up to the kitchen were blocked, Ben saw with cold horror; choked with rats. If the flit guns ran dry—

They couldn’t push it and still hold on to their hand-sprayers. “Hell with that,” Ben said. “Let’s tip it over.”

They both grabbed the back with one hand.

“Now,” Ben grunted, and they threw their shoulders into it. The Welsh dresser went over with a bonelike rattle and crash as Eva Miller’s long-ago wedding china shattered inside. The rats hurried forward, squeaking, and they drove them back again.

There was a small door, chest-high, set into the wall where the Welsh dresser had been. A new Yale padlock secured the hasp.

“Give me the hammer,” Ben said, and Mark handed it over. His eyes were rolling and jerking in an effort to follow the steady encroachment of the rats.

Two hard swings at the lock convinced him that it wasn’t going to give. “Jesus,” he muttered softly. Frustration welled up bitterly in his throat. He held up the flit gun and looked at it. Three-quarters empty. There were two nearly-full cans of holy water out in Jimmy Cody’s car, but it could have been a million miles away. To be balked like this—

No. He would bite through the wood with his teeth, if he had to.

He shone the flashlight around, and its beam fell on a neat Peg-Board hung with tools to the right of the stairs. Hung on two steel pegs was an ax with a rubber cover masking its blade.

He started across to it, and the rats closed in.

“For the love of Jesus!” he cried at them, and it seemed they flinched. He made it to the Peg-Board, took the ax down, and turned back. The rats had closed the path behind him, a solid sea of them. Mark stood backed up against the door to the root cellar, the flit gun held tightly in both hands.

Ben steeled himself and started back, kicking the rats out of the way, spraying them when he had to. They squeaked and chittered and bit. One ran up inside the cuff of his pants and bit his ankle through the sock. He kicked it loose violently and it flew through the air, twisting and still biting, now at nothingness.

“Keep them away from me,” he said to Mark, and slipped the rubber envelope off the blade. It glittered wickedly even in the dim light. Without thinking, he held the ax head up to the height of his forehead, offering it to something he could not see. “Be my strength,” he said, and there was nothing corny to the words, and also nothing prayerlike or petitioning or fainting. The words came out as a simple command, and to Mark, the rats seemed to shrink back for a moment, as if in horror.

The ax blade glimmered with a tracery of that eldritch fairy-light that Ben had seen before at Green’s Mortuary and in the cellar beneath the Marsten House. At the same time, power seemed to streak down the wooden handle to where his hands clasped it. He stood holding it for a moment, looking at the blade, and a sense of curious sureness gripped him, the feeling of a man who has bet on a fighter who has his opponent staggering and clinching in the third round. For the first time in two weeks, he felt he was no longer groping through fogs of belief and unbelief, sparring with a partner whose body was too insubstantial to sustain blows.

Power, humming up his arms like volts.

The blade glowed brighter.

“Do it,” Mark said. “Quick! Please!” He dropped his empty flit gun to the floor and the glass barrel shattered. He took Ben’s and began to spray again.

Ben Mears spread his feet, slung the ax back, and brought it down in a flashing arc that left an afterimage on the eye, like a time exposure. The blade bit wood with a booming, portentous sound and sunk to the haft. Splinters flew.

The rest of this section reads almost identical to the published novel.


In this section, the last of the deleted scenes of the published novel, they stake Barlow. In the original manuscript, they take Sarlinov’s coffin outside and let the sun do the work:

They let it go together, and Sarlinov’s coffin settled to the wet autumn earth. They looked at each other over it.

“Now?” Mark said. He walked around, and they stood side by side, in front of the coffin’s locks and seals.

“Yes,” Ben said.

They bent together, and the locks split as they touched them, making a sound like thin, snapping clapboards. They lifted.

Sarlinov was a young man now, his hair black and vibrant and lustrous, flowing over the satin pillow at the head of his narrow apartment. His skin glowed with life; the cheeks were as ruddy as wine. His teeth curved over his full lips, white with streaks of strong yellow, like ivory.

“He—” Mark began, and never finished.

The light struck him.

The eyes flew open, the lids rising like frightened window shades, and the chest hitched and air was suddenly pulled in with a terrible, windy inhalation that was nearly a scream. The mouth opened, revealing all the teeth and the tongue writhing among them like a red animal caught in a cage of snakes.

The shriek that erupted with the ebb of breath was awful, piercing, never to be forgotten—nailed to the brain in a sonic pattern of hellishness. The body writhed in the coffin like a stabbed fish. The teeth champed at the lips, the hands reached up blindly to hide the light, clawed the skin into bloody chevrons.

Then, dissolution.

It came in the space of two seconds, too fast to ever be fully believed in the daylight of later years, yet slow enough to recur again and again in nightmares, with awful stop-motion slowness.

The skin yellowed, coarsened, blistered, cracked like old sheets of canvas. The eyes faded, filmed white, fell in. The hair went white and fell like a drift of feathers. The body inside the dark suit shriveled and fell inward. The mouth widened gapingly as the lips drew back and drew back, meeting the nose and disappearing into an oral ring of jutting teeth. The fingernails blackened and fell off, and then there were only bones, still dressed with rings, clicking and clenching like castanets. Dust puffed through the fibers of the linen shirt. The bald and wrinkled head became a skull; the pants, with nothing to fill them out, fell away to broomsticks. For a moment a hideously animated scarecrow writhed before them. The fleshless skull whipped from side to side; the nude jawbone opened in a soundless scream that had no vocal cords to power it. The skeletal fingers rose and clicked in a marionette dance of repulsion.

Smells struck their noses and then vanished in tight little puffs: gas, putrescence, a moldy library smell, dust, then nothing. The twisting, protesting finger bones shredded and flaked away like pencils. The empty eye sockets widened in a fleshless expression of surprise and horror, met, and were no more. The skull caved in like an ancient Ming vase. The clothes settled flat and became as neutral as dirty laundry.

And still there was no end to its tenacious hold on the world; even the dust billowed and writhed in tiny dust devils within the coffin. And then, suddenly, they felt the passage of something between them which buffeted them like a strong wind, making them stagger backward. The limbs of the elm were suddenly whipped to a groaning frenzy by a wind from nowhere, a wind that departed as quickly as it had come. It was over. All that remained were the dark clothes and a ring of moldering teeth.