
FIVE

Mark Petrie was working on a model of Frankenstein’s monster in his room and listening to his parents down in the living room. His room was on the second floor of the farmhouse they had bought on South Jointner Avenue, and although the house was heated by a modern oil furnace now, the old second-floor grates were still there. Originally, when the house had been heated by a central kitchen stove, the warm-air grates had kept the second floor from becoming too cold—although the woman who had originally lived in this house with her dour Baptist husband from 1873 to 1896 had still taken a hot brick wrapped in flannel to bed with her—but now the grates served another purpose. They conducted sound excellently.

Although his parents were down in the living room, they might as well have been discussing him right outside the door.

Once, when his father had caught him listening at the door in their old house—Mark had only been six then—his father had told him an old English proverb: Never listen at a knothole lest you be vexed. That meant, his father said, that you may hear something about yourself that you don’t like.

Well, there was another one, too. Forewarned is forearmed.

At age twelve, Mark Petrie was a little skinnier than the average and slightly delicate-looking. Yet he moved with a grace and litheness that is not the common lot of boys his age, who seem mostly made up of knees and elbows and scabs. His complexion was fair, almost milky, and his features, which would be considered aquiline later in life, now seemed a trifle feminine. It had caused him some trouble even before the Richie Boddin incident in the schoolyard, and he had determined to handle it himself. He had made an analysis of the problem. Most bullies, he had decided, were big and ugly and clumsy. They scared people by being able to hurt them. They fought dirty. Therefore, if you were not afraid of being hurt a little, and if you were willing to fight dirty, a bully might be bested. Richie Boddin had been the first full vindication of his theory. He and the bully at the Kittery Elementary School had come off even (which had been a victory of a kind; the Kittery bully, bloody but unbowed, had proclaimed to the schoolyard community at large that he and Mark Petrie were pals. Mark, who thought the Kittery bully was a dumb piece of shit, did not contradict him. He understood discretion.). Talk did no good with bullies. Hurting was the only language that the Richie Boddins of the world seemed to understand, and Mark supposed that was why the world always had such a hard time getting along. He had been sent from school that day, and his father had been very angry until Mark, resigned to his ritual whipping with a rolled-up magazine, told him that Hitler had just been a Richie Boddin at heart. That had made his father laugh like hell, and even his mother snickered. The whipping had been averted.

Now June Petrie was saying: “Do you think it’s affected him, Henry?”

“Hard…to tell.” And Mark knew by the pause that his father was lighting his pipe. “He’s got a hell of a poker face.”

“Still waters run deep, though.” She paused. His mother was always saying things like still waters run deep or it’s a long, long road that has no turning. He loved them both dearly, but sometimes they seemed just as ponderous as the books in the folio section of the library…and just as dusty.

“They were on their way to see Mark,” she resumed. “To play with his train set…now one dead and one missing! Don’t fool yourself, Henry. The boy feels something.”

“He’s got his feet pretty solidly planted on the ground,” Mr Petrie said. “Whatever his feelings are, I’m sure he’s got them in hand.”

Mark glued the Frankenstein monster’s left arm into the shoulder socket. It was a specially treated Aurora model that glowed green in the dark, just like the plastic Jesus he had gotten for memorizing all of the 119th Psalm in Sunday school class in Kittery.

“I’ve sometimes thought we should have had another,” his father was saying. “Among other things, it would have been good for Mark.”

And his mother, in an arch tone: “Not for lack of trying, dear.”

His father grunted.

There was a long pause in the conversation. His father, he knew, would be rattling through The Wall Street Journal. His mother would be holding a novel by Jane Austen on her lap, or perhaps Henry James. She read them over and over again, and Mark was darned if he could see the sense in reading a book more than once. You knew how it was going to end.

“D’you think it’s safe to let him go in the woods behind the house?” his mother asked presently. “They say there’s quicksand somewhere in town—”

“Miles from here.”

Mark relaxed a little and glued the monster’s other arm on. He had a whole table of Aurora horror monsters, arranged in a scene that he changed each time a new element was added. It was a pretty good set. Danny and Ralphie had really been coming to see that the night when…whatever.

“I think it’s okay,” his father said. “Not after dark, of course.”

“Well, I hope that awful funeral won’t give him nightmares.”

Mark could almost see his father shrug. “Tony Glick…unfortunate. But death and grief are part of living. Time he got used to the idea.”

“Maybe.” Another long pause. What was coming now? he wondered. The child is the father of the man, maybe. Or as the twig is bent the tree is shaped. Mark glued the monster onto his base, which was a grave mound with a leaning headstone in the background. “In the midst of life we’re in death. But I may have nightmares.”

“Oh?”

“That Mr Foreman must be quite an artist, grisly as it sounds. He really looked as if he was just asleep. That any second he might open his eyes and yawn and…I don’t know why these people insist on torturing themselves with open-coffin services. It’s…heathenish.”

“Well, it’s over.”

“Yes, I suppose. He’s a good boy, isn’t he, Henry?”

“Mark? The best.”

Mark smiled.

“Is there anything on TV?”

“I’ll look.”

Mark turned the rest off; the serious discussion was done. He set his model on the windowsill to dry and harden. In another fifteen minutes his mother would be calling up for him to get ready for bed. He took his pajamas out of the top dresser drawer and began to undress.

In point of fact, his mother was worrying needlessly about his psyche, which was not tender at all. There was no particular reason why it should have been; he was a typical boy in most ways, despite his economy and his gracefulness. His family was upper middle class and still upwardly mobile, and the marriage of his parents was sound. They loved each other firmly, if a little stodgily. There had never been any great trauma in Mark’s life. The few school fights had not scarred him. He got along with his peers and in general wanted the same things they wanted.

If there was anything that set him apart, it was a reservoir of remoteness, of cool self-control. No one had inculcated it in him; he seemed to have been born with it. When his pet dog, Chopper, had been hit by a car, he had insisted on going with his mother to the vet’s. And when the vet had said, The dog has got to be put to sleep, my boy. Do you understand why? Mark said, You’re not going to put him to sleep. You’re going to gas him to death, aren’t you? The vet said yes. Mark told him to go ahead, but he had kissed Chopper first. He had felt sorry but he hadn’t cried and tears had never been close to the surface. His mother had cried but three days later Chopper was in the dim past to her, and he would never be in the dim past for Mark. That was the value in not crying. Crying was like pissing everything out on the ground.

He had been shocked by the disappearance of Ralphie Glick, and shocked again by Danny’s death, but he had not been frightened. He had heard one of the men in the store say that probably a sex pervert had gotten Ralphie. Mark knew what perverts were. They did something to you that got their rocks off and when they were done they strangled you (in the comic books, the guy getting strangled always said Arrrgggh) and buried you in a gravel pit or under the boards of a deserted shed. If a sex pervert ever offered him candy, he would kick him in the balls and then run like a split streak.

“Mark?” His mother’s voice, drifting up the stairs.

“I am,” he said, and smiled again.

“Don’t forget your ears when you wash.”

“I won’t.”

He went downstairs to kiss them good night, moving lithely and gracefully, sparing one glance backward to the table where his monsters rested in tableau: Dracula with his mouth open, showing his fangs, was menacing a girl lying on the ground while the Mad Doctor was torturing a lady on the rack and Mr Hyde was creeping up on an old guy walking home.

Understand death? Sure. That was when the monsters got you.


SIX

Roy McDougall pulled into the driveway of his trailer at half past eight, gunned the engine of his old Ford twice, and turned the engine off. The header pipe was just about shot, the blinkers didn’t work, and the sticker came up next month. Some car. Some life. The kid was howling in the house and Sandy was screaming at him. Great old marriage.

He got out of the car and fell over one of the flagstones he had been meaning to turn into a walk from the driveway to the steps since last summer.

“Shitfire,” he muttered, glowering balefully at the piece of flagging and rubbing his shin.

He was quite drunk. He had gotten off work at three and had been drinking down at Dell’s ever since with Hank Peters and Buddy Mayberry. Hank had been flush just lately, and seemed intent on drinking up the whole of his dividend, whatever it had been. He knew what Sandy thought of his buddies. Well, let her get tight-assed. Begrudge a man a few beers on Saturday and Sunday even though he spent the whole week breaking his back on the goddamn picker—and getting weekend overtime to boot. Who was she to get so holy? She spent all day sitting in the house with nothing to do but take care of the place and shoot the shit with the mailman and see that the kid didn’t crawl into the oven. She hadn’t been watching him too close lately, anyway. Goddamn kid even fell off the changing table the other day.

Where were you?

I was holding him, Roy. He just wriggles so.

Wriggles. Yeah.

He went up to the door, still steaming. His leg hurt where he had bumped it. Not that he’d get any sympathy from her. So what was she doing while he was sweating his guts out for that prick of a foreman? Reading confession magazines and eating chocolate-covered cherries or watching the soap operas on the TV and eating chocolate-covered cherries or gabbing to her friends on the phone and eating chocolate-covered cherries. She was getting pimples on her ass as well as her face. Pretty soon you wouldn’t be able to tell the two of them apart.

He pushed open the door and walked in.

The scene struck him immediately and forcibly, cutting through the beer haze like the flick of a wet towel: the baby, naked and screaming, blood running from his nose; Sandy holding him, her sleeveless blouse smeared with blood, looking at him over her shoulder, her face contracting with surprise and fear; the diaper on the floor.

Randy, with the discolored marks around his eyes barely fading, raised his hands as if in supplication.

“What’s going on around here?” Roy asked slowly.

“Nothing, Roy. He just—”

“You hit him,” he said tonelessly. “He wouldn’t hold still for the diapers so you smacked him.”

“No,” she said quickly. “He rolled over and bumped his nose, that’s all. That’s all.”

“I ought to beat the shit out of you,” he said.

“Roy, he just bumped his nose—”

His shoulders slumped. “What’s for dinner?”

“Hamburgs. They’re burnt,” she said petulantly, and pulled the bottom of her blouse out of her Wranglers to wipe under Randy’s nose. Roy could see the roll of fat she was getting. She’d never bounced back after the baby. Didn’t care.

“Shut him up.”

“He isn’t—”

“Shut him up!” Roy yelled, and Randy, who had actually been quieting down to snuffles, began to scream again.

“I’ll give him a bottle,” Sandy said, getting up.

“And get my dinner.” He started to take off his denim jacket. “Christ, isn’t this place a mess. What do you do all day, beat off?”

“Roy!” she said, sounding shocked. Then she giggled. Her insane burst of anger at the baby who would not hold still on his diapers so she could pin them began to be far away, hazy. It might have happened on one of her afternoon stories, or “Medical Center.”

“Get my dinner and then pick this frigging place up.”

“All right. All right, sure.” She got a bottle out of the refrigerator and put Randy down in the playpen with it. He began to suck it apathetically, his eyes moving from mother to father in small, trapped circles.

“Roy?”

“Hmmm? What?”

“It’s all over.”

“What is?”

“You know what. Do you want to? Tonight?”

“Sure,” he said. “Sure.” And thought again: Isn’t this some life. Isn’t this just some life.


SEVEN

Nolly Gardener was listening to rock ’n’ roll music on WLOB and snapping his fingers when the telephone rang. Parkins put down his crossword magazine and said, “Cut that some, will you?”

“Sure, Park.” Nolly turned the radio down and went on snapping his fingers.

“Hello?” Parkins said.

“Constable Gillespie?”

“Yeah.”

“Agent Tom Hanrahan here, sir. I’ve got the information you requested.”

“Good of you to get back so quick.”

“We haven’t got much of a hook for you.”

“That’s okay,” Parkins said. “What have you got?”

“Ben Mears investigated as a result of a traffic fatality in upstate New York, May 1973. No charges brought. Motorcycle smash. His wife, Miranda, was killed. Witnesses said he was moving slowly and a breath test was negative. Apparently just hit a wet spot. His politics are leftish. He was in a peace march at Princeton in 1966. Spoke at an antiwar rally in Brooklyn in 1967. March on Washington in 1968 and 1970. Arrested during a San Francisco peace march November 1971. And that’s all there is on him.”

“What else?”

“Kurt Barlow, that’s Kurt with a ‘k’. He’s British, but by naturalization rather than birth. Born in Germany, fled to England in 1938, apparently just ahead of the Gestapo. His earlier records just aren’t available, but he’s probably in his seventies. The name he was born with was Breichen. He’s been in the import-export business in London since 1945, but he’s elusive. Straker has been his partner since then, and Straker seems to be the fellow who deals with the public.”

“Yeah?”

“Straker is British by birth. Fifty-eight years old. His father was a cabinetmaker in Manchester. Left a fair amount of money to his son, apparently, and this Straker has done all right, too. Both of them applied for visas to spend an extended amount of time in the United States eighteen months ago. That’s all we have. Except that they may be queer for each other.”

“Yeah,” Parkins said, and sighed. “About what I thought.”

“If you’d like further assistance, we can query CID and Scotland Yard about your two new merchants.”

“No, that’s fine.”

“No connection between Mears and the other two, by the way. Unless it’s deep undercover.”

“Okay. Thanks.”

“It’s what we’re here for. If you want assistance, get in touch.”

“I will. Thank you now.”

He put the receiver back in its cradle and looked at it thoughtfully.

“Who was that, Park?” Nolly asked, turning up the radio.

“The Excellent Café. They ain’t got any ham on rye. Nothin’ but toasted cheese and egg salad.”

“I got some raspberry fluff in my desk if you want it.”

“No thanks,” Parkins said, and sighed again.


EIGHT

The dump was still smoldering.

Dud Rogers walked along the edge, smelling the fragrance of smoldering offal. Underfoot, small bottles crunched and powdery black ash puffed up at every step. Out in the dump’s wasteland, a wide bed of coals waxed and waned with the vagaries of the wind, reminding him of a huge red eye opening and closing…the eye of a giant. Every now and then there was a muffled small explosion as an aerosol can or lightbulb blew up. A great many rats had come out of the dump when he lit it that morning, more rats than he had ever seen before. He had shot fully three dozen, and his pistol had been hot to the touch when he finally tucked it back in its holster. They were big bastards, too, some of them fully two feet long stretched end to end. Funny how their numbers seemed to grow or shrink depending on the year. Had something to do with the weather, probably. If it kept up, he would have to start salting poison bait around, something he hadn’t had to do since 1964.

There was one now, creeping under one of the yellow sawhorses that served as fire barriers.

Dud pulled out his pistol, clicked off the safety, aimed, and fired. The shot kicked dirt in front of the rat, spraying its fur. But instead of running, it only rose up on its hind legs and looked at him, beady little eyes glittering red in the fire glow. Jesus, but some of them were bold!

“By-by, Mr Rat,” Dud said, and took careful aim.

Kapow. The rat flopped over, twitching.

Dud walked across and prodded it with one heavy work boot. The rat bit weakly at the shoe leather, its sides aspirating weakly.

“Bastard,” Dud said mildly, and crushed its head.

He hunkered down, looked at it, and found himself thinking of Ruthie Crockett, who wore no bra. When she wore one of those clingy cardigan sweaters, you could see her little nipples just as clear, made erect by the friction as they rubbed against the wool, and if a man could get ahold of those tits and rub them just a little, just a little, mind you, a slut like that would go off just like a rocket…

He picked the rat up by its tail and swung it like a pendulum. “How’d you like ole Mr Rat in your pencil box, Ruthie?” The thought with its unintentional double entendre amused him, and he uttered a high-pitched giggle, his oddly off-center head nodding and dipping.

He slung the rat far out into the dump. As he did so, he swung around and caught sight of a figure—a tall, extremely thin silhouette about fifty paces to the right.

Dud wiped his hands on his green pants, hitched them up, and strolled over.

“Dump’s closed, mister.”

The man turned toward him. The face that was discovered in the red glow of the dying fire was high-cheekboned and thoughtful. The hair was white, streaked with oddly virile slashes of iron gray. The guy had it swept back from his high, waxy forehead like one of those fag concert pianists. The eyes caught and held the red glow of the embers and made them look bloodshot.

“Is it?” the man asked politely, and there was a faint accent in the words, although they were perfectly spoken. The guy might be a frog, or maybe a bohunk. “I came to watch the fire. It is beautiful.”

“Yeah,” Dud said. “You from around here?”

“I am a recent resident of your lovely town, yes. Do you shoot many rats?”

“Quite a few, yeah. Just lately there’s millions of the little sonsa-whores. Say, you ain’t the fella who bought the Marsten place, are you?”

“Predators,” the man said, crossing his hands behind his back. Dud noticed with surprise that the guy was all tricked out in a suit, vest and all. “I love the predators of the night. The rats…the owls…the wolves. Are there wolves in this area?”

“Naw,” Dud said. “Guy up in Durham bagged a coyote two years ago. And there’s a wild-dog pack that’s been runnin’ deer—”

“Dogs,” the stranger said, and gestured with contempt. “Low animals that cringe and howl at the sound of a strange step. Fit only to whine and grovel. Gut them all, I say. Gut them all!”

“Well, I never thought of it that way,” Dud said, taking a shuffling step backward. “It’s always nice to have someone come out and, you know, shoot the shit, but the dump closes at six on Sundays and it’s happast nine now—”

“To be sure.”

Yet the stranger showed no sign of moving away. Dud was thinking that he had stolen a march on the rest of the town. They were all wondering who was behind that Straker guy, and he was the first to know—except maybe for Larry Crockett, who was a deep one. The next time he was in town buying shells from that prissy-faced George Middler, he would just happen to say casually: Happened to meet that new fella the other night. Who? Oh, you know. Fella that took the Marsten House. Nice enough fella. Talked a little like a bohunk.

“Any ghosts up in that old house?” he asked, when the old party showed no signs of hauling ass.

“Ghosts!” The old party smiled, and there was something very disquieting about that smile. A barracuda might smile like that. “No; no ghosts.” He placed a faint emphasis on that last word, as if there might be something up there that was even worse.

“Well…gettin’ late and all…you really ought to go now, Mister—?”

“But it’s so pleasant, speaking with you,” the old party said, and for the first time he turned his full face to Dud and looked in his eyes. The eyes were wide-set, and still rimmed with the dump’s sullen fire. There was no way you could look away from them, although it wasn’t polite to stare. “You don’t mind if we converse a bit longer, do you?”

“No, I guess not,” Dud said, and his voice sounded far away. Those eyes seemed to be expanding, growing, until they were like dark pits ringed with fire, pits you could fall into and drown in.

“Thank you,” he said. “Tell me…does the hump on your back discommode you in your job?”

“No,” Dud said, still feeling far away. He thought faintly: I be buggered if he ain’t hypnotizin’ me. Just like that fella at Topsham Fair…what was his name? Mr Mephisto. He’d put you to sleep and make you do all kinds of comical things—act like a chicken or run around like a dog or tell what happened at the birthday party you had when you were six. He hypnotized ole Reggie Sawyer and Gawd didn’t we laugh…

“Does it perhaps inconvenience you in other ways?”

“No…well…” He looked into the eyes, fascinated.

“Come, come,” the old party’s voice cajoled gently. “We are friends, are we not? Speak to me, tell me.”

“Well…girls…you know, girls…”

“Of course,” the old party said soothingly. “The girls laugh at you, do they not? They have no knowing of your manhood. Of your strength.”

“That’s right,” Dud whispered. “They laugh. She laughs.”

“Who is this she?”

“Ruthie Crockett. She…she…” The thought flew away. He let it. It didn’t matter. Nothing mattered except this peace. This cool and complete peace.

“She makes the jokes perhaps? Snickers behind her hand? Nudges her friends when you pass?”

“Yes…”

“But you want her,” the voice insisted. “Is it not so?”

“Oh yes…”

“You shall have her. I am sure of it.”

There was something…pleasant about this. Far away he seemed to hear sweet voices singing foul words. Silver chimes…white faces…Ruthie Crockett’s voice. He could almost see her, hands cupping her titties, making them bulge into the V of her cardigan sweater in ripe white half-globes, whispering: Kiss them, Dud…bite them…suck them…

It was like drowning. Drowning in the old man’s red-rimmed eyes.

As the stranger came closer, Dud understood everything and welcomed it, and when the pain came, it was as sweet as silver, as green as still water at dark fathoms.


NINE

His hand was unsteady and instead of gripping the bottle the fingers knocked it off the desk and to the carpet with a heavy thump, where it lay gurgling good scotch into the green nap.

“Shit!” said Father Donald Callahan, and reached down to pick it up before all was lost. There was, in fact, not much to lose. He set what was left on the desk again (well back from the edge) and wandered into the kitchen to look for a rag under the sink and a bottle of cleaning fluid. It would never do to let Mrs Curless find a patch of spilled scotch by the leg of his study desk. Her kind, pitying looks were too hard to take on the long, grainy mornings when you were feeling a little low—

Hung over, you mean.

Yes, hung over, very good. Let’s have a little truth around here, by all means. Know the truth and it will set you free. Bully for the truth.

He found a bottle of something called E-Vap, which was not too far from the sound of violent regurgitation (“E-Vap!” croaked the old drunk, simultaneously crapping himself and blowing lunch), and took it back to the study. He was not weaving at all. Hardly at all. Watch this, Ossifer, I’m going to walk right up this white line to the stop light.

Callahan was an imposing fifty-three. His hair was silvery, his eyes a direct blue (now threaded with tiny snaps of red) surrounded by Irish laugh wrinkles, his mouth firm, his slightly cleft chin firmer still. Some mornings, looking at himself in the mirror, he thought that when he reached sixty he would throw over the priesthood, go to Hollywood, and get a job playing Spencer Tracy.

“Father Flanagan, where are you when we need you?” he muttered, and hunkered down by the stain. He squinted, read the instructions on the label of the bottle, and poured two capfuls of E-Vap onto the stain. The patch immediately turned white and began to bubble. Callahan viewed this with some alarm, and consulted the label again.

“For really tough stains,” he read aloud in the rich, rolling voice that had made him so welcome in this parish after the long, denture-clicking peregrinations of poor old Father Hume, “allow to set for seven to ten minutes.”

He went over to the study window, which fronted on Elm Street and St Andrew’s on the far side.

Well, well, he thought. Here I am, Sunday night and drunk again.

Bless me, Father, for I have sinned.

If you went slow and if you continued to work (on his long, solitary evenings, Father Callahan worked on his Notes. He had been working on the Notes for nearly seven years, supposedly for a book on the Catholic Church in New England, but he suspected now and then that the book would never be written. In point of fact, the Notes and his drinking problem had begun at the same time. Genesis 1:1—“In the beginning there was scotch, and Father Callahan said, Let there be Notes.”), you were hardly aware of the slow growth of drunkenness. You could educate your hand not to be aware of the bottle’s lessening weight.

It has been at least one day since my last confession.

It was eleven-thirty, and looking out the window he saw uniform darkness, broken only by the spotlight circle of the streetlight in front of the church. At any moment Fred Astaire would dance into it, wearing a top hat, tails, spats, and white shoes, twirling a cane. He is met by Ginger Rogers. They waltz to the tune of “I Got Dem Ol’ Kozmic E-Vap Blues Again.”

He leaned his forehead against the glass, allowing the handsome face that had been, in some measure at least, his curse sag into drawn lines of distracted weariness.

I’m a drunk and I’m a lousy priest, Father.

With his eyes closed he could see the darkness of the confessional booth, could feel his fingers sliding back the window and rolling up the shade on all the secrets of the human heart, could smell varnish and old velvet from the kneeling benches and the sweat of old men; could taste alkali traces in his saliva.

Bless me, Father,

(I broke my brother’s wagon, I hit my wife, I peeked in Mrs Sawyer’s window when she was undressing, I lied, I cheated, I have had lustful thoughts, I, I, I)

for I have sinned.

He opened his eyes and Fred Astaire had not appeared yet. On the stroke of midnight, perhaps. His town was asleep. Except—

He glanced up. Yes, the lights were on up there.

He thought of the Bowie girl—no, McDougall, her name was McDougall now—saying in her breathy little voice that she had hit her baby and when he asked how often, he could sense (could almost hear) the wheels turning in her mind, making a dozen times five, or a hundred a dozen. Sad excuse for a human being. He had baptized the baby. Randall Fratus McDougall. Conceived in the backseat of Royce McDougall’s car, probably during the second feature of a drive-in double bill. Tiny screaming little thing. He wondered if she knew or guessed that he would like to reach through the little window with both hands and grasp the soul on the other side as it fluttered and twisted and squeeze it until it screamed. Your penance is six head-knocks and a good swift kick in the ass. Go your way and sin no more.

“Dull,” he said.

But there was more than dullness in the confessional; it was not that by itself that had sickened him or propelled him toward that always widening club, Associated Catholic Priests of the Bottle and Knights of the Cutty Sark. It was the steady, dead, onrushing engine of the church, bearing down all petty sins on its endless shuttle to heaven. It was the ritualistic acknowledgment of evil by a church now more concerned with social evils; atonement told in beads for elderly ladies whose parents had spoken European tongues. It was the actual presence of evil in the confessional, as real as the smell of old velvet. But it was a mindless, moronic evil from which there was no mercy or reprieve. The fist crashing into the baby’s face, the tire cut open with a jackknife, the barroom brawl, the insertion of razor blades into Halloween apples, the constant, vapid qualifiers which the human mind, in all its labyrinthine twists and turns, is able to spew forth. Gentlemen, better prisons will cure this. Better cops. Better social services agencies. Better birth control. Better sterilization techniques. Better abortions. Gentlemen, if we rip this fetus from the womb in a bloody tangle of unformed arms and legs, it will never grow up to beat an old lady to death with a hammer. Ladies, if we strap this man into a specially wired chair and fry him like a pork chop in a microwave oven, he will never have an opportunity to torture any more boys to death. Countrymen, if this eugenics bill is passed, I can guarantee you that never again—

Shit.

The truth of his condition had been becoming clearer and clearer to him for some time now, perhaps for as long as three years. It had gained clarity and resolution like an out-of-focus motion picture being adjusted until every line is sharp and defined. He had been pining for a Challenge. The new priests had theirs: racial discrimination, women’s liberation, even gay liberation; poverty, insanity, illegality. They made him uncomfortable. The only socially conscious priests he felt at ease with were the ones who had been militantly opposed to the war in Vietnam. Now that their cause had become obsolete, they sat around and discussed marches and rallies the way old married couples discuss their honeymoons or their first train rides. But Callahan was neither a new priest nor an old one; he found himself cast in the role of a traditionalist who can no longer even trust his basic postulates. He wanted to lead a division in the army of—who? God, right, goodness, they were names for the same thing—into battle against EVIL. He wanted issues and battle lines and never mind standing in the cold outside supermarkets handing out leaflets about the lettuce boycott or the grape strike. He wanted to see EVIL with its cerements of deception cast aside, with every feature of its visage clear. He wanted to slug it out toe to toe with EVIL, like Muhammad Ali against Joe Frazier, the Celtics against the Knicks, Jacob against the Angel. He wanted this struggle to be pure, unhindered by the politics that rode the back of every social issue like a deformed Siamese twin. He had wanted all this since he had wanted to be a priest, and that call had come to him at the age of fourteen, when he had been inflamed by the story of St Stephen, the first Christian martyr, who had been stoned to death and who had seen Christ at the moment of his death. Heaven was a dim attraction compared to that of fighting—and perhaps perishing—in the service of the Lord.

But there were no battles. There were only skirmishes of vague resolution. And EVIL did not wear one face but many, and all of them were vacuous and more often than not the chin was slicked with drool. In fact, he was being forced to the conclusion that there was no EVIL in the world at all but only evil—or perhaps (evil). At moments like this he suspected that Hitler had been nothing but a harried bureaucrat and Satan himself a mental defective with a rudimentary sense of humor—the kind that finds feeding firecrackers wrapped in bread to seagulls unutterably funny.

The great social, moral, and spiritual battles of the ages boiled down to Sandy McDougall slamming her snot-nosed kid in the corner and the kid would grow up and slam his own kid in the corner, world without end, hallelujah, chunky peanut butter. Hail Mary, full of grace, help me win this stock-car race.

It was more than dull. It was terrifying in its consequences for any meaningful definition of life, and perhaps of heaven. What there? An eternity of church bingo, amusement park rides, and celestial drag strips?

He looked over at the clock on the wall. It was six minutes past midnight and still no sign of Fred Astaire or Ginger Rogers. Not even Mickey Rooney. But the E-Vap had had time to set. Now he would vacuum it up and Mrs Curless would not look at him with that expression of pity, and life would go on. Amen.





Chapter Seven

Matt

At the end of period three on Tuesday, Matt walked up to the office and Ben Mears was there waiting for him.

“Hi,” Matt said. “You’re early.”

Ben stood up and shook hands. “Family curse, I guess. Say, these kids aren’t going to eat me, are they?”

“Positive,” Matt said. “Come on.”

He was a little surprised. Ben had dressed in a nice-looking sport coat and a pair of gray double-knit slacks. Good shoes that looked as if they hadn’t been worn much. Matt had had other literary types into his classes and they were usually dressed in casual clothes or something downright weird. A year ago he had asked a rather well-known female poet who had done a reading at the University of Maine at Portland if she would come in the following day and talk to a class about poetry. She had shown up in pedal pushers and high heels. It seemed to be a subconscious way of saying: Look at me, I’ve beaten the system at its own game. I come and go like the wind.

His admiration for Ben went up a notch in comparison. After thirty-plus years of teaching, he believed that nobody beat the system or won the game, and only suckers ever thought they were ahead.

“It’s a nice building,” Ben said, looking around as they walked down the hall. “Helluva lot different from where I went to high school. Most of the windows in that place looked like loopholes.”

“First mistake,” Matt said. “You must never call it a building. It’s a ‘plant.’ Blackboards are ‘visual aids.’ And the kids are a ‘homogenous midteen coeducational student body.’”

“How wonderful for them,” Ben said, grinning.

“It is, isn’t it? Did you go to college, Ben?”

“I tried. Liberal arts. But everybody seemed to be playing an intellectual game of capture-the-flag—you too can find an ax and grind it, thus becoming known and loved. Also, I flunked out. When Conway’s Daughter sold, I was bucking cases of Coca-Cola onto delivery trucks.”

“Tell the kids that. They’ll be interested.”

“You like teaching?” Ben said.

“Sure I like it. It would have been a busted-axle forty years if I didn’t.”

The late bell rang, echoing loudly in the corridor, which was empty now except for one loitering student who was wandering slowly past a painted arrow under a sign which read “Wood Shop.”

“How’s drugs here?” Ben asked.

“All kinds. Like every school in America. Ours is booze more than anything else.”

“Not marijuana?”

“I don’t consider pot a problem and neither does the administration, when it speaks off the record with a few knocks of Jim Beam under its belt. I happen to know that our guidance counselor, who is one of the best in his line, isn’t averse to toking up and going to a movie. I’ve tried it myself. The effect is fine, but it gives me acid indigestion.”

“You have?”

“Shhh,” Matt said. “Big Brother is listening everywhere. Besides, this is my room.”

“Oh boy.”

“Don’t be nervous,” Matt said, and led him in. “Good morning, folks,” he said to the twenty or so students, who were eying Ben closely. “This is Mr Ben Mears.”


TWO

At first Ben thought he had the wrong house.

When Matt Burke invited him for supper he was quite sure he had said the house was the small gray one after the red brick, but there was rock ’n’ roll music pouring from this one in a steady stream.

He used the tarnished brass knocker, got no answer, and rapped again. This time the music was turned down and a voice that was unmistakably Matt’s yelled, “It’s open! Come on in!”

He did, looking around curiously. The front door opened directly on a small living room furnished in Early American Junk Shop and dominated by an incredibly ancient Motorola TV. A KLH sound system with quad speakers was putting out the music.

Matt came out of the kitchen, outfitted in a red-and-white checked apron. The odor of spaghetti sauce wandered out after him.

“Sorry about the noise,” Matt said. “I’m a little deaf. I turn it up.”

“Good music.”

“I’ve been a rock fan ever since Buddy Holly. Lovely music. Are you hungry?”

“Yeah,” Ben said. “Thanks again for asking me. I’ve eaten out more since I came back to ’salem’s Lot than I have in the last five years, I guess.”

“It’s a friendly town. Hope you don’t mind eating in the kitchen. An antique man came by a couple of months ago and offered me two hundred dollars for my dining room table. I haven’t gotten around to getting another one.”

“I don’t mind. I’m a kitchen eater from a long line of kitchen eaters.”

The kitchen was astringently neat. On the small four-burner stove, a pot of spaghetti sauce simmered and a colander full of spaghetti stood steaming. A small drop-leaf table was set with a couple of mismatched plates and glasses which had animated cartoon figures dancing around the rims—jelly glasses, Ben thought with amusement. The last constraint of being with a stranger dropped away and he began to feel at home.

“There’s Bourbon, rye, and vodka in the cupboard over the sink,” Matt said, pointing. “There’s some mixers in the fridge. Nothing too fancy, I’m afraid.”

“Bourbon and tap water will do me.”

“Go to it. I’m going to serve this mess up.”

Mixing his drink, Ben said, “I liked your kids. They asked good questions. Tough, but good.”

“Like where do you get your ideas?” Matt asked, mimicking Ruthie Crockett’s sexy little-girl lisp.

“She’s quite a piece.”

“She is indeed. There’s a bottle of Lancers in the icebox behind the pineapple chunks. I got it special.”

“Say, you shouldn’t—”

“Oh come, Ben. We hardly see best-selling authors in the Lot every day.”

“That’s a little extravagant.”

Ben finished the rest of his drink, took a plate of spaghetti from Matt, ladled sauce over it, and twirled a forkful against his spoon. “Fantastic,” he said. “Mamma mia.”

“But of course,” Matt said.

Ben looked down at his plate, which had emptied with amazing rapidity. He wiped his mouth a little guiltily.

“More?”

“Half a plate, if it’s okay. It’s great spaghetti.”

Matt brought him a whole plate. “If we don’t eat it, my cat will. He’s a miserable animal. Weighs twenty pounds and waddles to his dish.”

“Lord, how did I miss him?”

Matt smiled. “He’s cruising. Is your new book a novel?”

“A fictionalized sort of thing,” Ben said. “To be honest, I’m writing it for money. Art is wonderful, but just once I’d like to pull a big number out of the hat.”

“What are the prospects?”

“Murky,” Ben said.

“Let’s go in the living room,” Matt said. “The chairs are lumpy but more comfortable than these kitchen horrors. Did you get enough to eat?”

“Does the Pope wear a tall hat?”

In the living room Matt put on a stack of albums and went to work firing up a huge, knotted calabash pipe. After he had it going to his satisfaction (sitting in the middle of a huge raft of smoke), he looked up at Ben.

“No,” he said. “You can’t see it from here.”

Ben looked around sharply. “What?”

“The Marsten House. I’ll bet you a nickel that’s what you were looking for.”

Ben laughed uneasily. “No bet.”

“Is your book set in a town like ’salem’s Lot?”

“Town and people.” Ben nodded. “There are a series of sex murders and mutilations. I’m going to open with one of them and describe it in progress, from start to finish, in minute detail. Rub the reader’s nose in it. I was outlining that part when Ralphie Glick disappeared and it gave me…well, it gave me a nasty turn.”

“You’re basing all of this on the disappearances of the thirties in the township?”

Ben looked at him closely. “You know about that?”

“Oh yes. A good many of the older residents do, too. I wasn’t in the Lot then, but Mabel Werts and Glynis Mayberry and Milt Crossen were. Some of them have made the connection already.”

“What connection?”

“Come now, Ben. The connection is pretty obvious, isn’t it?”

“I suppose so. The last time the house was occupied, four kids disappeared over a period of ten years. Now it’s occupied again after a thirty-six-year period, and Ralphie Glick disappears right off the bat.”

“Do you think it’s a coincidence?”

“I suppose so,” Ben said cautiously. Susan’s words of caution were very much in his ears. “But it’s funny. I checked through the copies of the Ledger from 1939 to 1970 just to get a comparison. Three kids disappeared. One ran off and was later found working in Boston—he was sixteen and looked older. Another one was fished out of the Androscoggin a month later. And one was found buried off Route 116 in Gates, apparently the victim of a hit-and-run. All explained.”

“Perhaps the Glick boy’s disappearance will be explained, too.”

“Maybe.”

“But you don’t think so. What do you know about this man Straker?”

“Nothing at all,” Ben said. “I’m not even sure I want to meet him. I’ve got a viable book working right now, and it’s bound up in a certain concept of the Marsten House and inhabitants of that house. Discovering Straker to be a perfectly ordinary businessman, as I’m sure he is, might knock me off kilter.”

“I don’t think that would be the case. He opened the store today, you know. Susie Norton and her mother dropped by, I understand…hell, most of the women in town got in long enough to get a peek. According to Dell Markey, an unimpeachable source, even Mabel Werts hobbled down. The man is supposed to be quite striking. A dandy dresser, extremely graceful, totally bald. And charming. I’m told he actually sold some pieces.”

Ben grinned. “Wonderful. Has anyone seen the other half of the team?”

“He’s on a buying trip, supposedly.”

“Why supposedly?”

Matt shrugged restlessly. “I don’t know. The whole thing is probably perfectly on the level, but the house makes me nervous. Almost as if the two of them had sought it out. As you said, it’s like an idol, squatting there on top of its hill.”

Ben nodded.

“And on top of everything else, we have another child disappearance. And Ralphie’s brother, Danny. Dead at twelve. Cause of death pernicious anemia.”

“What’s odd about that? It’s unfortunate, of course—”

“My doctor is a young fellow named Jimmy Cody, Ben. I had him in school. He was a little heller then, a good doctor now. This is gossip, mind you. Hearsay.”

“Okay.”

“I was in for a checkup, and happened to mention that it was a shame about the Glick boy, dreadful for his parents on top of the other one’s vanishing act. Jimmy said he had consulted with George Gorby on the case. The boy was anemic, all right. He said that a red cell count on a boy Danny’s age should run anywhere from eighty-five to ninety-eight percent. Danny’s was down to forty-five percent.”

“Wow,” Ben said.

“They were giving him B12 injections and calf liver and it seemed to be working fine. They were going to release him the next day. And boom, he dropped dead.”

“You don’t want to let Mabel Werts get that,” Ben said. “She’ll be seeing natives with poison blowguns in the park.”

“I haven’t mentioned it to anyone but you. And I don’t intend to. And by the way, Ben, I believe I’d keep the subject matter of your book quiet, if I were you. If Loretta Starcher asks what you’re writing about, tell her it’s architecture.”

“I’ve already been given that advice.”

“By Susan Norton, no doubt.”

Ben looked at his watch and stood up. “Speaking of Susan—”

“The courting male in full plumage,” Matt said. “As it happens, I have to go up to the school. We are reblocking the third act of the school play, a comedy of great social significance called Charley’s Problem.”

“What is his problem?”

“Pimples,” Matt said, and grinned.

They walked to the door together, Matt pausing to pull on a faded school letter jacket. Ben thought he had the figure of an aging track coach rather than that of a sedentary English teacher—if you ignored his face, which was intelligent yet dreamy, and somehow innocent.

“Listen,” Matt said as they went out onto the stoop, “what have you got on the stove for Friday night?”

“I don’t know,” Ben said. “I thought Susan and I might go to a movie. That’s about the long and short of it around here.”

“I can think of something else,” Matt said. “Perhaps we should form a committee of three and take a drive up to the Marsten House and introduce ourselves to the new squire. On behalf of the town, of course.”

“Of course,” Ben said. “It would be only common courtesy, wouldn’t it?”

“A rustic welcome wagon,” Matt agreed.

“I’ll mention it to Susan tonight. I think she’ll go for it.”

“Good.”

Matt raised his hand and waved as Ben’s Citroën purred away. Ben tooted twice in acknowledgment, and then his taillights disappeared over the hill.

Matt stood on his stoop for almost a full minute after the sound of the car had died away, his hands poked into his jacket pockets, his eyes turned toward the house on the hill.


THREE

There was no play practice Thursday night, and Matt drove over to Dell’s around nine o’clock for two or three beers. If that damn snip Jimmy Cody wouldn’t prescribe for his insomnia, he would prescribe for himself.

Dell’s was sparsely populated on nights when no band played. Matt saw only three people he knew: Weasel Craig, nursing a beer alone in the corner; Floyd Tibbits, with thunderclouds on his brow (he had spoken to Susan three times this week, twice on the phone and once in person, in the Norton living room, and none of the conversations had gone well); and Mike Ryerson, who was sitting in one of the far booths against the wall.

Matt walked over to the bar, where Dell Markey was polishing glasses and watching “Ironside” on a portable TV.

“Hi, Matt. How’s it going?”

“Fair. Slow night.”

Dell shrugged. “Yeah. They got a couple of motorcycle pictures over to the drive-in in Gates. I can’t compete with that. Glass or pitcher?”

“Make it a pitcher.”

Dell drew it, cut the foam off, and added another two inches. Matt paid, and after a moment’s hesitation, walked over to Mike’s booth. Mike had filtered through one of Matt’s English classes, like almost all the young people in the Lot, and Matt had enjoyed him. He had done above-average work with an average intelligence because he worked hard and had asked over and over about things he didn’t understand until he got them. In addition to that, he had a clear, free-running sense of humor and a pleasant streak of individualism that made him a class favorite.

“Hi, Mike,” he said. “Mind if I join you?”

Mike Ryerson looked up and Matt felt shock hit him like a live wire. His first reaction: Drugs. Heavy drugs.

“Sure, Mr Burke. Sit down.” His voice was listless. His complexion was a horrid, pasty white, darkening to deep shadows under his eyes. The eyes themselves seemed overlarge and hectic. His hands moved slowly across the table in the tavern’s semigloom like ghosts. A glass of beer stood untouched before him.

“How are you doing, Mike?” Matt poured himself a glass of beer, controlling his hands, which wanted to shake.

His life had always been one of sweet evenness, a graph with modulate highs and lows (and even those had sunk to foothills since the death of his mother thirteen years before), and one of the things that disturbed it was the miserable ends some of his students came to. Billy Royko dying in a Vietnam helicopter crash two months before the cease-fire; Sally Greer, one of the brightest and most vivacious girls he had ever had, killed by her drunken boyfriend when she told him she wanted to break up; Gary Coleman, who had gone blind due to some mysterious optic nerve degeneration; Buddy Mayberry’s brother Doug, the only good kid in that whole half-bright clan, drowning at Old Orchard Beach; and drugs, the little death. Not all of them who waded into the waters of Lethe found it necessary to take a bath in it, but there were enough—kids who had made dreams their protein.

“Doing?” Mike said slowly. “I don’t know, Mr Burke. Not so good.”

“What kind of shit are you on, Mike?” Matt asked gently.

Mike looked at him uncomprehendingly.

“Dope,” Matt said. “Bennies? Reds? Coke? Or is it—”

“I’m not on dope,” Mike said. “I guess I’m sick.”

“Is that the truth?”

“I never did no heavy dope in my life,” Mike said, and the words seemed to be costing him a dreadful effort. “Just grass, and I ain’t had any of that for four months. I’m sick…been sick since Monday, I think it was. I fell asleep out at Harmony Hill Sunday night, see. Never even woke up until Monday morning.” He shook his head slowly. “I felt crappy. I’ve felt crappy ever since. Worse every day, it seems like.” He sighed, and the whistle of air seemed to shake his frame like a dead leaf on a November maple.

Matt leaned forward, concerned. “This happened after Danny Glick’s funeral?”

“Yeah.” Mike looked at him again. “I came back to finish up after everybody went home but that fucking—excuse me, Mr Burke—that Royal Snow never showed up. I waited for him a long time, and that’s when I must have started to get sick, because everything after that is…oh, it hurts my head. It’s hard to think.”

“What do you remember, Mike?”

“Remember?” Mike looked into the golden depths of his beer glass and watched the bubbles detaching themselves from the sides and floating to the surface to release their gas.

“I remember singing,” he said. “The sweetest singing I ever heard. And a feeling like…like drowning. Only it was nice. Except for the eyes. The eyes.”

He clutched his elbows and shuddered.

“Whose eyes?” Matt asked, leaning forward.

“They were red. Oh, scary eyes.”

“Whose?”

“I don’t remember. No eyes. I dreamed it all.” He pushed it away from himself. Matt could almost see him do it. “I don’t remember anything else about Sunday night. I woke up Monday morning on the ground, and at first I couldn’t even get up I was so tired. But I finally did. The sun was coming up and I was afraid I’d get a sunburn. So I went down in the woods by the brook. Tired me out. Oh, awful tired. So I went back to sleep. Slept till…oh, four or five o’clock.” He offered a papery little chuckle. “I was all covered with leaves when I woke up. I felt a little better, though. I got up and went back to my truck.” He passed a slow hand over his face. “I must have finished up with the little Glick boy Sunday night, though. Funny. I don’t even remember.”

“Finished up?”

“Grave was all filled in, Royal or no Royal. Sods tamped in and all. A good job. Don’t remember doing it. Must have been really sick.”

“Where did you spend Monday night?”

“At my place. Where else?”

“How did you feel Tuesday morning?”

“I never woke up Tuesday morning. Slept through the whole day. Never woke up until Tuesday night.”

“How did you feel then?”

“Terrible. Legs like rubber. I tried to go get a drink of water and almost fell down. I had to go into the kitchen holding on to things. Weak as a kitten.” He frowned. “I had a can of stew for my dinner—you know, that Dinty Moore stuff—but I couldn’t eat it. Seemed like just looking at it made me feel sick to my stomach. Like when you’ve got an awful hangover and someone shows you food.”

“You didn’t eat anything?”

“I tried, but I threw it up. But I felt a little better. I went out and walked around for a while. Then I went back to bed.” His fingers traced old beer rings on the table. “I got scared before I went to bed. Just like a little kid afraid of the Allamagoosalum. I went around and made sure all the windows were locked. And I went to sleep with all the lights on.”

“And yesterday morning?”

“Hmmm? No…never got up until nine o’clock last night.” He offered the papery little chuckle again. “I remember thinking if it kept up I’d be sleeping the clock right around. And that’s what you do when you’re dead.”

Matt regarded him somberly. Floyd Tibbits got up and put a quarter in the juke and began to punch up songs.

“Funny,” Mike said. “My bedroom window was open when I got up. I must have done it myself. I had a dream…someone was at the window and I got up…got up to let him in. Like you’d get up to let in an old friend who was cold or…or hungry.”

“Who was it?”

“It was just a dream, Mr Burke.”

“But in the dream who was it?”

“I don’t know. I was going to try and eat, but the thought of it made me want to puke.”

“What did you do?”

“I watched TV until Johnny Carson went off. I felt a lot better. Then I went to bed.”

“Did you lock the windows?”

“No.”

“And slept all day?”

“I woke up around sundown.”

“Weak?”

“I hope to tell.” He passed a hand over his face. “I feel so low!” he cried out in a breaking voice. “It’s just the flu or something, isn’t it, Mr Burke? I’m not really sick, am I?”

“I don’t know,” Matt said.

“I thought a few beers would cheer me up, but I can’t drink it. I took one sip and it like to gag me. The last week…it all seems like a bad dream. And I’m scared. I’m awful scared.” He put his thin hands to his face and Matt saw that he was crying.

“Mike?”

No response.

“Mike.” Gently, he pulled Mike’s hands away from his face. “I want you to come home with me tonight. I want you to sleep in my guest room. Will you do that?”

“All right. I don’t care.” He wiped his sleeve across his eyes with lethargic slowness.

“And tomorrow I want you to come see Dr Cody with me.”

“All right.”

“Come on. Let’s go.”

He thought of calling Ben Mears and didn’t.


FOUR

When Matt knocked on the door, Mike Ryerson said, “Come in.”

Matt came in with a pair of pajamas. “These are going to be a little big—”

“That’s all right, Mr Burke. I sleep in my skivvies.”

He was standing in his shorts now, and Matt saw that his entire body was horribly pale. His ribs stood out in circular ridges.

“Turn your head, Mike. This way.”

Mike turned his head obediently.

“Mike, where did you get those marks?”

Mike’s hand touched his throat below the angle of the jaw. “I don’t know.”

Matt stood restively. Then he went to the window. The catch was securely fastened, yet he rattled it back and forth with hands that were distraught. Beyond, the dark pressed against the glass heavily. “Call me in the night if you want anything. Anything. Even if you have a bad dream. Will you do that, Mike?”

“Yes.”

“I mean it. Anything. I’m right down the hall.”

“I will.”

Hesitating, feeling there were other things he should do, he went out.


FIVE

He didn’t sleep at all, and the only thing now that kept him from calling Ben Mears was knowing that everyone at Eva’s would be in bed. The boardinghouse was filled with old men, and when the phone rang late at night, it meant that someone had died.

He lay restively, watching the luminous hands of his alarm clock move from eleven-thirty to twelve. The house was preternaturally silent—perhaps because his ears were consciously attuned to catch the slightest noise. The house was an old one and built solidly, and its settling groans had mostly ceased long before. There were no sounds but the clock and the faint passage of the wind outside. No cars passed on Taggart Stream Road late on week nights.

What you’re thinking is madness.

But step by step he had been forced backward toward belief. Of course, being a literary man, it had been the first thing that had come to mind when Jimmy Cody had thumbnailed Danny Glick’s case. He and Cody had laughed over it. Maybe this was his punishment for laughing.

Scratches? Those marks weren’t scratches. They were punctures.

One was taught that such things could not be; that things like Coleridge’s “Cristabel” or Bram Stoker’s evil fairy tale were only the warp and woof of fantasy. Of course monsters existed; they were the men with their fingers on the thermonuclear triggers in six countries, the hijackers, the mass murderers, the child molesters. But not this. One knows better. The mark of the devil on a woman’s breast is only a mole, the man who came back from the dead and stood at his wife’s door dressed in the cerements of the grave was only suffering from locomotor ataxia, the bogeyman who gibbers and capers in the corner of a child’s bedroom is only a heap of blankets. Some clergymen had proclaimed that even God, that venerable white warlock, was dead.

He was bled almost white.

No sound from up the hall. Matt thought: He is sleeping like the stones himself. Well, why not? Why had he invited Mike back to the house, if not for a good night’s sleep, uninterrupted by…by bad dreams? He got out of bed and turned on the lamp and went to the window. From here one could just see the rooftop of the Marsten House, frosted in moonlight.

I’m frightened.

But it was worse than that; he was dead scared. His mind ran over the old protections for an unmentionable disease: garlic, holy wafer and water, crucifix, rose, running water. He had none of the holy things. He was a nonpracticing Methodist, and privately thought that John Groggins was the asshole of the Western world.

The only religious object in the house was—

Softly yet clearly in the silent house the words came, spoken in Mike Ryerson’s voice, spoken in the dead accents of sleep:

“Yes. Come in.”

Matt’s breath stopped, then whistled out in a soundless scream. He felt faint with fear. His belly seemed to have turned to lead. His testicles had drawn up. What in God’s name had been invited into his house?

Stealthily, the sound of the hasp on the guest room window being turned back. Then the grind of wood against wood as the window was forced up.

He could go downstairs. Run, get the Bible from the dresser in the dining room. Run back up, jerk open the door to the guest room, hold the Bible high: In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, I command you to be gone—

But who was in there?

Call me in the night if you want anything.

But I can’t, Mike. I’m an old man. I’m afraid.

Night invaded his brain and made it a circus of terrifying images which danced in and out of the shadows. Clown-white faces, huge eyes, sharp teeth, forms that slipped from the shadows with long white hands that reached for…for…

A shuddering groan escaped him, and he put his hands over his face.

I can’t. I am afraid.

He could not have risen even if the brass knob on his own door had begun to turn. He was paralyzed with fear and wished crazily that he had never gone out to Dell’s that night.

I am afraid.

And in the awful heavy silence of the house, as he sat impotently on his bed with his face in his hands, he heard the high, sweet, evil laugh of a child—

—and then the sucking sounds.





Part Two

The Emperor of Ice Cream

Call the roller of big cigars,

The muscular one, and bid him whip

In kitchen cups concupiscent curds.

Let the wenches dawdle in such dress

As they are used to wear, and let the boys

Bring flowers in last month’s newspapers.

Let be be finale of seem.

The only emperor is the emperor of ice cream.



Take from the dresser of deal,

Lacking the three glass knobs, that sheet

On which she embroidered three fantails once

And spread it so as to cover her face.

If her horny feet protrude, they come

To show how cold she is, and dumb.

Let the lamp affix its beam.

The only emperor is the emperor of ice cream.

WALLACE STEVENS



This column has

A hole. Can you see

The Queen of the Dead?

GEORGE SEFERIS





Chapter Eight

Ben (III)

The knocking must have been going on for a long time, because it seemed to echo far down the avenues of sleep as he slowly struggled up to wakefulness. It was dark outside, but when he turned to grasp the clock and bring it to his face, he knocked it onto the floor. He felt disoriented and frightened.

“Who is it?” he called out.

“It’s Eva, Mr Mears. There’s a phone call for you.”

He got up, pulled on his pants, and opened the door bare-chested. Eva Miller was in a white terry-cloth robe, and her face was full of the slow vulnerability of a person still two-fifths asleep. They looked at each other nakedly, and he was thinking: Who’s sick? Who’s died?

“Long-distance?”

“No, it’s Matthew Burke.”

The knowledge did not relieve him as it should have done. “What time is it?”

“Just after four. Mr Burke sounds very upset.”

Ben went downstairs and picked the phone up. “This is Ben, Matt.”

Matt was breathing rapidly into the phone, the sound of his respiration coming in harsh little blurts. “Can you come, Ben? Right now?”

“Yes, all right. What’s the matter? Are you sick?”

“Not on the phone. Just come.”

“Ten minutes.”

“Ben?”

“Yes.”

“Have you got a crucifix? A St Christopher’s medallion? Anything like that?”

“Hell no. I’m—was—a Baptist.”

“All right. Come fast.”

Ben hung up and went back upstairs quickly. Eva was standing with one hand on the newel post, her face filled with worry and indecision—on one hand wanting to know, on the other, not wanting to mix in the tenant’s business.

“Is Mr Burke sick, Mr Mears?”

“He says not. He just asked me…say, you aren’t Catholic?”

“My husband was.”

“Do you have a crucifix or a rosary or a St Christopher’s medallion?”

“Well…my husband’s crucifix is in the bedroom…I could…”

“Yes, would you?”

She went up the hall, her furry slippers scuffing at the faded strip of carpet. Ben went into his room, pulled on yesterday’s shirt, and slipped his bare feet into a pair of loafers. When he came out again, Eva was standing by his door, holding the crucifix. It caught the light and threw back dim silver.

“Thank you,” he said, taking it.

“Did Mr Burke ask you for this?”

“Yes, he did.”

She was frowning, more awake now. “He’s not Catholic. I don’t believe he goes to church.”

“He didn’t explain to me.”

“Oh.” She nodded in a charade of understanding and gave him the crucifix. “Please be careful of it. It has great value for me.”

“I understand that. I will.”

“I hope Mr Burke is all right. He’s a fine man.”

He went downstairs and out onto the porch. He could not hold the crucifix and dig for his car keys at the same time, and instead of simply transferring it from his right hand to his left, he slipped it over his neck. The silver slipped comfortably against his shirt, and getting into the car he was hardly aware that he felt comforted.


TWO

Every window on the lower floor of Matt’s house was lit up, and when Ben’s headlights splashed across the front as he turned into the driveway, Matt opened the door and waited for him.

He came up the walk ready for almost anything, but Matt’s face was still a shock. It was deadly pale, and the mouth was trembling. His eyes were wide, and they didn’t seem to blink.

“Let’s go in the kitchen,” he said.

Ben came in, and as he stepped inside, the hall light caught the cross lying against his chest.

“You brought one.”

“It belongs to Eva Miller. What’s the matter?”

Matt repeated: “In the kitchen.” As they passed the stairs leading to the second floor, he glanced upward and seemed to flinch away at the same time.

The kitchen table where they had eaten spaghetti was bare now except for three items, two of them peculiar: a cup of coffee, an old-fashioned clasp Bible, and a .38 revolver.

“Now, what’s up, Matt? You look awful.”

“And maybe I dreamed the whole thing, but thank God you’re here.” He had picked up the revolver and was turning it over restively in his hands.

“Tell me. And stop playing with that thing. Is it loaded?”

Matt put the pistol down and ran a hand through his hair. “Yes, it’s loaded. Although I don’t think it would do any good…unless I used it on myself.” He laughed, a jagged, unhealthy sound like grinding glass.

“Stop that.”

The harshness in his voice broke the queer, fixed look in his eyes. He shook his head, not like a man propounding a negative, but the way some animals will shake themselves coming out of cold water.

“There’s a dead man upstairs,” he said.

“Who?”

“Mike Ryerson. He works for the town. He’s a groundskeeper.”

“Are you sure he’s dead?”

“I am in my guts, even though I haven’t looked in on him. I haven’t dared. Because, in another way, he may not be dead at all.”

“Matt, you’re not talking good sense.”

“Don’t you think I know that? I’m talking nonsense and I’m thinking madness. But there was no one to call but you. In all of ’salem’s Lot, you’re the only person that might…might…” He shook his head and began again. “We talked about Danny Glick.”

“Yes.”

“And how he might have died of pernicious anemia…what our grandfathers would have called ‘just wasting away.’”

“Yes.”

“Mike buried him. And Mike found Win Purinton’s dog impaled on the Harmony Hill Cemetery gates. I met Mike Ryerson in Dell’s last night, and—”


THREE

“—and I couldn’t go in,” he finished. “Couldn’t. I sat on my bed for nearly four hours. Then I crept downstairs like a thief and called you. What do you think?”

Ben had taken the crucifix off; now he poked at the glimmering heap of fine-link chain with a reflective finger. It was almost five o’clock and the eastern sky was rose with dawn. The fluorescent bar overhead had gone pallid.

“I think we’d better go up to your guest room and look. That’s all, I think, right now.”

“The whole thing seems like a madman’s nightmare now, with the light coming in the window.” He laughed shakily. “I hope it is. I hope Mike is sleeping like a baby.”

“Well, let’s go see.”

Matt firmed his lips with an effort. “Okay.” He dropped his eyes to the table and then looked at Ben questioningly.

“Sure,” Ben said, and slipped the crucifix over Matt’s neck.

“It actually does make me feel better.” He laughed self-consciously. “Do you suppose they’ll let me wear it when they cart me off to Augusta?”

Ben said, “Do you want the gun?”

“No, I guess not. I’d stick it in the top of my pants and blow my balls off.”

They went upstairs, Ben in the lead. There was a short hall at the top, running both ways. At one end, the door to Matt’s bedroom stood open, a pale sheaf of lamplight spilling out onto the orange runner.

“Down at the other end,” Matt said.

Ben walked down the hall and stood in front of the guest room door. He did not believe the monstrosity Matt had implied, but nonetheless he found himself engulfed by a wave of the blackest fright he had ever known.

You open the door and he’s hanging from the beam, the face swelled and puffed and black, and then the eyes open and they’re bulging in the sockets but they’re SEEING you and they’re glad you came—

The memory rose up in almost total sensory reference, and for the moment of its totality he was paralyzed. He could even smell the plaster and the wild odor of nesting animals. It seemed to him that the plain varnished wood door of Matt Burke’s guest room stood between him and all the secrets of hell.

Then he twisted the knob and pushed the door inward. Matt was at his shoulder, and he was holding Eva’s crucifix tightly.

The guest room window faced directly east, and the top arc of the sun had just cleared the horizon. The first pellucid rays shone directly through the window, isolating a few golden motes as it fell in a shaft to the white linen sheet that was pulled up to Mike Ryerson’s chest.

Ben looked at Matt and nodded. “He’s all right,” he whispered. “Sleeping.”

Matt said tonelessly, “The window’s open. It was closed and locked. I made sure of it.”

Ben’s eyes centered on the upper hem of the flawlessly laundered sheet that covered Mike. There was a single small drop of blood on it, dried to maroon.

“I don’t think he’s breathing,” Matt said.

Ben took two steps forward and then stopped. “Mike? Mike Ryerson. Wake up, Mike!”

No response. Mike’s lashes lay cleanly against his cheeks. His hair was tousled loosely across his brow, and Ben thought that in the first delicate light he was more than handsome; he was as beautiful as the profile of a Greek statue. Light color bloomed in his cheeks, and his body held none of the deathly pallor Matt had mentioned—only healthy skin tones.

“Of course he’s breathing,” he said a trifle impatiently. “Just fast asleep. Mike—” He stretched out a hand and shook Ryerson slightly. Mike’s left arm, which had been crossed loosely on his chest, fell limply over the side of the bed and the knuckles rapped on the floor, like a request for entry.

Matt stepped forward and picked up the limp arm. He pressed his index finger over the wrist. “No pulse.”

He started to drop it, remembered the grisly knocking noise the knuckles had made, and put the arm across Ryerson’s chest. It started to fall anyway, and he put it back more firmly with a grimace.

Ben couldn’t believe it. He was sleeping, had to be. The good color, the obvious suppleness of the muscles, the lips half parted as if to draw breath…unreality washed over him. He placed his wrist against Ryerson’s shoulder and found the skin cool.

He moistened his finger and held it in front of those half-open lips. Nothing. Not a feather of breath.

He and Matt looked at each other.

“The marks on the neck?” Matt asked.

Ben took Ryerson’s jaw in his hands and turned it gently until the exposed cheek lay against the pillow. The movement dislodged the left arm, and the knuckles rapped the floor again.

There were no marks on Mike Ryerson’s neck.


FOUR

They were at the kitchen table again. It was 5:35 am. They could hear the lowing of the Griffen cows as they were let into their east pasturage down the hill and beyond the belt of shrubbery and underbrush that screened Taggart Stream from view.

“According to folklore, the marks disappear,” Matt said suddenly. “When the victim dies, the marks disappear.”

“I know that,” Ben said. He remembered it both from Stoker’s Dracula and from the Hammer films starring Christopher Lee.

“We have to put an ash stake through his heart.”

“You better think again,” Ben said, and sipped his coffee. “That would be damned hard to explain to a coroner’s jury. You’d go to jail for desecrating a corpse at the very least. More likely to the funny farm.”

“Do you think I’m crazy?” Matt asked quietly.

With no discernible hesitation, Ben said, “No.”

“Do you believe me about the marks?”

“I don’t know. I guess I have to. Why would you lie to me? I can’t see any gain for you in a lie. I suppose you’d lie if you had killed him.”

“Perhaps I did, then,” Matt said, watching him.

“There are three things going against it. First, what’s your motive? Pardon me, Matt, but you’re just too old for the classic ones like jealousy and money to fit very well. Second, what was your method? If it was poison, he must have gone very easily. He certainly looks peaceful enough. And that eliminates most of the common poisons right there.”

“What’s your third reason?”

“No murderer in his right mind would invent a story like yours to cover up murder. It would be insane.”

“We keep coming back to my mental health,” Matt said. He sighed. “I knew we would.”

“I don’t think you’re crazy,” Ben said, accenting the first word slightly. “You seem rational enough.”

“But you’re not a doctor, are you?” Matt asked. “And crazy people are sometimes able to counterfeit sanity remarkably well.”

Ben agreed. “So where does that put us?”

“Back to square one.”

“No. Neither one of us can afford that, because there’s a dead man upstairs and pretty soon he’s going to have to be explained. The constable is going to want to know what happened, and so is the medical examiner, and so is the county sheriff. Matt, could it be that Mike Ryerson was just sick with some virus all week and happened to drop dead in your house?”

For the first time since they had come back down, Matt showed signs of agitation. “Ben, I told you what he said! I saw the marks on his neck! And I heard him invite someone into my house! Then I heard…God, I heard that laugh!” His eyes had taken on that peculiar blank look again.

“All right,” Ben said. He got up and went to the window, trying to set his thoughts in order. They didn’t go well. As he had told Susan, things seemed to have a way of getting out of hand.

He was looking toward the Marsten House.

“Matt, do you know what’s going to happen to you if you even let out a whisper of what you’ve told me?”

Matt didn’t answer.

“People are going to start tapping their foreheads behind your back when you go by in the street. Little kids are going to get out their Halloween wax teeth when they see you coming and jump out and yell Boo! when you walk by their hedge. Somebody will invent a rhyme like One, two, three, four, I’m gonna suck your blood some more. The high school kids will pick it up and you’ll hear it in the halls when you pass. Your colleagues will begin looking at you strangely. There’s apt to be anonymous phone calls from people purporting to be Danny Glick or Mike Ryerson. They’ll turn your life into a nightmare. They’ll hound you out of town in six months.”

“They wouldn’t. They know me.”

Ben turned from the window. “Who do they know? A funny old duck who lives alone out on Taggart Stream Road. Just the fact that you’re not married is apt to make them believe you’ve got a screw loose anyway. And what backup can I give you? I saw the body but nothing else. Even if I had, they would just say I was an outsider. They would even get around to telling each other we were a couple of queers and this was the way we got our kicks.”

Matt was looking at him with slowly dawning horror.

“One word, Matt. That’s all it will take to finish you in ’salem’s Lot.”

“So there’s nothing to be done.”

“Yes, there is. You have a certain theory about who—or what—killed Mike Ryerson. The theory is relatively simple to prove or disprove, I think. I’m in a hell of a fix. I can’t believe you’re crazy, but I can’t believe that Danny Glick came back from the dead and sucked Mike Ryerson’s blood for a whole week before killing him, either. But I’m going to put the idea to the test. And you’ve got to help.”

“How?”

“Call your doctor, Cody is his name? Then call Parkins Gillespie. Let the machinery take over. Tell your story just as though you’d never heard a thing in the night. You went into Dell’s and sat down with Mike. He said he’d been feeling sick since last Sunday. You invited him home with you. You went in to check him around three-thirty this morning, couldn’t wake him, and called me.”

“That’s all?”

“That’s it. When you speak to Cody, don’t even say he’s dead.”

“Not dead—”

“Christ, how do we know he is?” Ben exploded. “You took his pulse and couldn’t find it; I tried to find his breath and couldn’t do it. If I thought someone was going to shove me into my grave on that basis, I’d damn well pack a lunch. Especially if I looked as lifelike as he does.”

“That bothers you as much as it does me, doesn’t it?”

“Yes, it bothers me,” Ben admitted. “He looks like a goddamn waxwork.”

“All right,” Matt said. “You’re talking sense…as much as anyone can in a business like this. I guess I sounded nuts, at that.”

Ben started to deprecate, but Matt waved it off. “But suppose…just hypothetically…that my first suspicion is right? Would you want even the remotest possibility in the back of your mind? The possibility that Mike might…come back?”

“As I said, that theory is easy enough to prove or disprove. And it isn’t what bothers me about all this.”

“What is?”

“Just a minute. First things first. Proving or disproving it ought to be no more than an exercise in logic—ruling out possibilities. First possibility: Mike died of some disease—a virus or something. How do you confirm that or rule it out?”

Matt shrugged. “Medical examination, I suppose.”

“Exactly. And the same method to confirm or rule out foul play. If somebody poisoned him or shot him or got him to eat a piece of fudge with a bundle of wires in it—”

“Murder has gone undetected before.”

“Sure it has. But I’ll bet on the medical examiner.”

“And if the medical examiner’s verdict is ‘unknown cause’?”

“Then,” Ben said deliberately, “we can visit the grave after the funeral and see if he rises. If he does—which I can’t conceive of—we’ll know. If he doesn’t, we’re faced with the thing that bothers me.”

“The fact of my insanity,” Matt said slowly. “Ben, I swear on my mother’s name that those marks were there, that I heard the window go up, that—”

“I believe you,” Ben said quietly.

Matt stopped. His expression was that of a man who has braced himself for a crash that never came.

“You do?” he said uncertainly.

“To put it another way, I refuse to believe that you’re crazy or had a hallucination. I had an experience once…an experience that had to do with that damned house on the hill…that makes me extremely sympathetic to people whose stories seem utterly insane in light of rational knowledge. I’ll tell you about that, one day.”

“Why not now?”

“There’s no time. You have those calls to make. And I have one more question. Think about it carefully. Do you have any enemies?”

“No one who qualifies for something like this.”

“An ex-student, maybe? One with a grudge?”

Matt, who knew exactly to what extent he influenced the lives of his students, laughed politely.

“Okay,” Ben said. “I’ll take your word for it.” He shook his head. “I don’t like it. First that dog shows up on the cemetery gates. Then Ralphie Glick disappears, his brother dies, and Mike Ryerson. Maybe they all tie in somehow. But this…I can’t believe it.”

“I better call Cody’s home,” Matt said, getting up. “Parkins will be at home.”

“Call in sick at school, too.”

“Right.” Matt laughed without force. “It will be my first sick day in three years. A real occasion.”

He went into the living room and began to make his calls, waiting at the end of each number sequence for the bell to prod sleepers awake. Cody’s wife apparently referred him to Cumberland Receiving, for he dialed another number, asked for Cody, and went into his story after a short wait.

He hung up and called into the kitchen: “Jimmy will be here in an hour.”

“Good,” Ben said. “I’m going upstairs.”

“Don’t touch anything.”

“No.”

By the time he reached the second-floor landing he could hear Matt on the phone to Parkins Gillespie, answering questions. The words melted into a background murmur as he went down the hall.

That feeling of half-remembered, half-imagined terror washed over him again as he contemplated the door to the guest room. In his mind’s eye he could see himself stepping forward, pushing it open. The room looks larger, seen from a child’s eye view. The body lies as they left it, left arm dangling to the floor, left cheek pressed against the pillowcase which still shows the fold lines from the linen closet. The eyes suddenly open, and they are filled with blank, animalistic triumph. The door slams shut. The left arm comes up, the hand hooked into a claw, and the lips twist into a vulpine smile that shows incisors grown wondrously long and sharp—

He stepped forward and pushed the door with tented fingers. The lower hinges squeaked slightly.

The body lay as they had left it, left arm fallen, left cheek pressed against the pillowcase—

“Parkins is coming,” Matt said from the hallway behind him, and Ben nearly screamed.