TEN

It was five to seven. Ben felt tension begin to seep into his body.

“Might as well stop staring at the clock,” Jimmy said. “You can’t make it go any faster by looking at it.”

Ben started guiltily.

“I doubt very much that vampires—if they exist at all—rise at almanac sunset,” Jimmy said. “It’s never full dark.”

Nonetheless he got up and shut off the TV, catching a wood duck in mid-squawk.

Silence descended on the room like a blanket. They were in Green’s workroom, and the body of Marjorie Glick was on a stainless-steel table equipped with gutters and foot stirrups that could be raised or depressed. It reminded Ben of the tables in hospital delivery rooms.

Jimmy had turned back the sheet that covered her body when they entered and had made a brief examination. Mrs Glick was wearing a burgundy-colored quilted housecoat and knitted slippers. There was a Band-Aid on her left shin, perhaps covering a shaving nick. Ben looked away from it, but his eyes were drawn back again and again.

“What do you think?” Ben had asked.

“I’m not going to commit myself when another three hours will probably decide one way or the other. But her condition is strikingly similar to that of Mike Ryerson—no surface lividity, no sign of rigor or incipient rigor.” And he had pulled the sheet back and would say no more.

It was 7:02.

Jimmy suddenly said, “Where’s your cross?”

Ben started. “Cross? Jesus, I don’t have one!”

“You were never a Boy Scout,” Jimmy said, and opened his bag. “I, however, always come prepared.”

He brought out two tongue depressors, stripped off the protective cellophane, and bound them together at right angles with a twist of Red Cross tape.

“Bless it,” he said to Ben.

“What? I can’t…I don’t know how.”

“Then make it up,” Jimmy said, and his pleasant face suddenly appeared strained. “You’re the writer; you’ll have to be the metaphysician. For Christ’s sake, hurry. I think something is going to happen. Can’t you feel it?”

And Ben could. Something seemed to be gathering in the slow purple twilight, unseen as yet, but heavy and electric. His mouth had gone dry, and he had to wet his lips before he could speak.

“In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.” Then he added, as an afterthought: “In the name of the Virgin Mary, too. Bless this cross and…and…”

Words rose to his lips with sudden, eerie surety.

“The Lord is my shepherd,” he spoke, and the words fell into the shadowy room as stones would have fallen into a deep lake, sinking out of sight without a ripple. “I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: He leadeth me beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul.”

Jimmy’s voice joined his own, chanting.

“He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name’s sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil—”

It seemed hard to breathe properly. Ben found that his whole body had crawled into goose flesh, and the short hairs on the nape of his neck had begun to prickle, as if they were rising into hackles.

“Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over. Surely goodness and mercy shall—”

The sheet covering Marjorie Glick’s body had begun to tremble. A hand fell out below the sheet and the fingers began to dance jaggedly on the air, twisting and turning.

“My Christ, am I seeing this?” Jimmy whispered. His face had gone pale and his freckles stood out like spatters on a windowpane.

“—follow me all the days of my life,” Ben finished. “Jimmy, look at the cross.”

The cross was glowing. The light spilled over his hand in an elvish flood.

A slow, choked voice spoke in the stillness, as grating as shards of broken crockery: “Danny?”

Ben felt his tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth. The form under the sheet was sitting up. Shadows in the darkening room moved and slithered.

“Danny, where are you, darling?”

The sheet fell from her face and crumpled in her lap.

The face of Marjorie Glick was a pallid, moonlike circle in the semi-dark, punched only by the black holes of her eyes. She saw them, and her mouth juddered open in an awful, cheated snarl. The fading glow of daylight flashed against her teeth.

She swung her legs over the side of the table; one of the slippers fell off and lay unheeded.

“Sit right there!” Jimmy told her. “Don’t try to move.”

Her answer was a snarl, a dark silver sound, doglike. She slid off the table, staggered, and walked toward them. Ben caught himself looking into those punched eyes and wrenched his gaze away. There were black galaxies shot with red in there. You could see yourself, drowning and liking it.

“Don’t look in her face,” he told Jimmy.

They were retreating from her without thought, allowing her to force them toward the narrow hall which led to the stairs.

“Try the cross, Ben.”

He had almost forgotten he had it. Now he held it up, and the cross seemed to flash with brilliance. He had to squint against it. Mrs Glick made a hissing, dismayed noise and threw her hands up in front of her face. Her features seemed to draw together, twitching and writhing like a nest of snakes. She tottered a step backward.

“That’s got her!” Jimmy yelled.

Ben advanced on her, holding the cross out before him. She hooked one hand into a claw and made a swipe at it. Ben dipped it below her hand and then thrust it at her. A ululating scream came from her throat.

For Ben, the rest took on the maroon tones of nightmare. Although worse horrors were to come, the dreams of the following days and nights were always of driving Marjorie Glick back toward that mortician’s table, where the sheet that had covered her lay crumpled beside one knitted slipper.

She retreated unwillingly, her eyes alternating between the hateful cross and an area on Ben’s neck to the right of the chin. The sounds that were wrenched out of her were inhuman gibberings and hissings and glottals, and there was something so blindly reluctant in her withdrawal that she began to seem like some giant, lumbering insect. Ben thought: If I didn’t have this cross out front, she would rip my throat open with her nails and gulp down the blood that spurted out of the jugular and carotid like a man just out of the desert and dying of thirst. She would bathe in it.

Jimmy had cut away from his side, and was circling her to the left. She didn’t see him. Her eyes were fixed only on Ben, dark and filled with hatred…filled with fear.

Jimmy circled the mortician’s table, and when she backed around it, he threw both arms around her neck with a convulsive yell.

She gave a high, whistling cry and twisted in his grip. Ben saw Jimmy’s nails pull away a flap of her skin at the shoulder, and nothing welled out—the cut was like a lipless mouth. And then, incredibly, she threw him across the room. Jimmy crashed into the corner, knocking Maury Green’s portable TV off its stand.

She was on him in a flash, moving in a hunched, scrabbling run that was nearly spiderlike. Ben caught a shadow-scrawled glimpse of her falling on top of him, ripping at his collar, and then the sideward predatory lunge of her head, the yawning of her jaws, as she battened on him.

Jimmy Cody screamed—the high, despairing scream of the utterly damned.

Ben threw himself at her, stumbling and nearly falling over the shattered television on the floor. He could hear her harsh breathing, like the rattle of straw, and below that, the revolting sound of smacking, champing lips.

He grabbed her by the collar of her housecoat and yanked her upward, forgetting the cross momentarily. Her head came around with frightening swiftness. Her eyes were dilated and glittering, her lips and chin slicked with blood that was black in this near-total darkness.

Her breath in his face was foul beyond measure, the breath of tombs. As if in slow motion, he could see her tongue lick across her teeth.

He brought the cross up just as she jerked him forward into her embrace, her strength making him feel like something made of rags. The rounded point of the tongue depressor that formed the cross’s down-stroke struck her under the chin—and then continued upward with no fleshy resistance. Ben’s eyes were stunned by a flash of not-light that happened not before his eyes but seemingly behind them. There was the hot and porcine smell of burning flesh. Her scream this time was full-throated and agonized. He sensed rather than saw her throw herself backward, stumble over the television, and fall on the floor, one white arm thrown outward to break her fall. She was up again with wolflike agility, her eyes narrowed in pain, yet still filled with her insane hunger. The flesh of her lower jaw was smoking and black. She was snarling at him.

“Come on, you bitch,” he panted. “Come on, come on.”

He held the cross out before him again, and backed her into the corner at the far left of the room. When he got her there, he was going to jam the cross through her forehead.

But even as her back pressed the narrowing walls, she uttered a high, squealing giggle that made him wince. It was like the sound of a fork being dragged across a porcelain sink.

“Even now one laughs! Even now your circle is smaller!”

And before his eyes her body seemed to elongate and become translucent. For a moment he thought she was still there, laughing at him, and then the white glow of the streetlamp outside was shining on bare wall, and there was only a fleeting sensation on his nerve endings, which seemed to be reporting that she had seeped into the very pores of the wall, like smoke.

She was gone.

And Jimmy was screaming.


ELEVEN

He flicked on the overhead bar of fluorescents and turned to look at Jimmy, but Jimmy was already on his feet, holding his hands to the side of his neck. The fingers were sparkling scarlet.

“She bit me!” Jimmy howled. “Oh God-Jesus, she bit me!”

Ben went to him, tried to take him in his arms, and Jimmy pushed him away. His eyes rolled madly in their sockets.

“Don’t touch me. I’m unclean.”

“Jimmy—”

“Give me my bag. Jesus, Ben, I can feel it in there. I can feel it working in me. For Christ’s sake, give me my bag!”

It was in the corner. Ben got it, and Jimmy snatched it. He went to the mortician’s table and set the bag on it. His face was death pale, shining with sweat. The blood pulsed remorselessly from the torn gash in the side of his neck. He sat down on the table and opened the bag and swept through it, his breath coming in whining gasps through his open mouth.

“She bit me,” he muttered into the bag. “Her mouth…oh God, her dirty filthy mouth…”

He pulled a bottle of disinfectant out of the bag and sent the cap spinning across the tiled floor. He leaned back, supporting himself on one arm, and upended the bottle over his throat, and it splashed the wound, his slacks, the table. Blood washed away in threads. His eyes closed and he screamed once, then again. The bottle never wavered.

“Jimmy, what can I—”

“In a minute,” Jimmy muttered. “Wait. It’s better, I think. Wait, just wait—”

He tossed the bottle away and it shattered on the floor. The wound, washed clean of the tainted blood, was clearly visible. Ben saw there was not one but two puncture wounds not far from the jugular, one of them horribly mangled.

Jimmy had pulled an ampoule and a hypo from the bag. He stripped the protective covering from the needle and jabbed it through the ampoule. His hands were shaking so badly he had to make two thrusts at it. He filled the needle and held it out to Ben.

“Tetanus,” he said. “Give it to me. Here.” He held his arm out, rotated to expose the armpit.

“Jimmy, that’ll knock you out.”

“No. No, it won’t. Do it.”

Ben took the needle and looked questioningly into Jimmy’s eyes. He nodded. Ben injected the needle.

Jimmy’s body tensed like spring steel. For a moment he was a sculpture in agony, every tendon pulled out into sharp relief. Little by little he began to relax. His body shuddered in reaction, and Ben saw that tears had mixed with the sweat on his face.

“Put the cross on me,” he said. “If I’m still dirty from her, it’ll…it’ll do something to me.”

“Will it?”

“I’m sure it will. When you were going after her, I looked up and I wanted to go after you. God help me, I did. And I looked at that cross and I…my belly wanted to heave up.”

Ben put the cross on his neck. Nothing happened. Its glow—if there had been a glow at all—was entirely gone. Ben took the cross away.

“Okay,” Jimmy said. “I think that’s all we can do.” He rummaged in his bag again, found an envelope containing two pills, and crushed them into his mouth. “Dope,” he said. “Great invention. Thank God I used the john before that…before it happened. I think I pissed myself, but it only came to about six drops. Can you bandage my neck?”

“I think so,” Ben said.

Jimmy handed him gauze, adhesive tape, and a pair of surgical scissors. Bending to put the bandage on, he saw that the skin around the wounds had gone an ugly, congealed red. Jimmy flinched when he pressed the bandage gently into place.

He said: “For a couple of minutes there, I thought I was going to go nuts. Really, clinically nuts. Her lips on me…biting me…” His throat rippled as he swallowed. “And when she was doing it, I liked it, Ben. That’s the hellish part. I actually had an erection. Can you believe it? If you hadn’t been here to pull her off, I would have…would have let her…”

“Never mind,” Ben said.

“There’s one more thing I have to do that I don’t like.”

“What’s that?”

“Here. Look at me a minute.”

Ben finished the bandage and drew back a little to look at Jimmy. “What—”

And suddenly Jimmy slugged him. Stars rocketed up in his brain and he took three wandering steps backward and sat down heavily. He shook his head and saw Jimmy getting carefully down from the table and coming toward him. He groped madly for the cross, thinking: This is what’s known as an O. Henry ending, you stupid shit, you stupid, stupid—

“You all right?” Jimmy was asking him. “I’m sorry, but it’s a little easier when you don’t know it’s coming.”

“What the Christ—?”

Jimmy sat down beside him on the floor. “I’m going to tell you our story,” he said. “It’s a damned poor one, but I’m pretty sure Maury Green will back it up. It will keep my practice, and keep us both out of jail or some asylum…and at this point, I’m not so concerned about those things as I am about staying free to fight these…things, whatever you want to call them, another day. Do you understand that?”

“The thrust of it,” Ben said. He touched his jaw and winced. There was a knot to the left of his chin.

“Somebody barged in on us while I was examining Mrs Glick,” Jimmy said. “The somebody coldcocked you and then used me for a punching bag. During the struggle, the somebody bit me to make me let him go. That’s all either of us remembers. All. Understand?”

Ben nodded.

“The guy was wearing a dark CPO coat, maybe blue, maybe black, and a green or gray knitted cap. That’s all you saw. Okay?”

“Have you ever thought about giving up doctoring in favor of a career in creative writing?”

Jimmy smiled. “I’m only creative in moments of extreme self-interest. Can you remember the story?”

“Sure. And I don’t think it’s as poor as you might believe. After all, hers isn’t the first body that’s disappeared lately.”

“I’m hoping they’ll add that up. But the county sheriff is a lot more on the ball than Parkins Gillespie ever thought of being. We have to watch our step. Don’t embellish the story.”

“Do you suppose anyone in officialdom will begin to see the pattern in all this?”

Jimmy shook his head. “Not a chance in the world. We’re going to have to bumble through this on our own. And remember that from this point on, we’re criminals.”

Shortly after, he went to the phone and called Maury Green, then County Sheriff Homer McCaslin.


TWELVE

Ben got back to Eva’s at about fifteen minutes past midnight and made himself a cup of coffee in the deserted downstairs kitchen. He drank it slowly, reviewing the night’s events with all the intense recall of a man who has just escaped falling from a high ledge.

The county sheriff was a tall, balding man. He chewed tobacco. He moved slowly, but his eyes were bright with observation. He had pulled an enormous battered notebook on a chain from his hip pocket, and an old thick-barreled fountain pen from under his green wool vest. He had questioned Ben and Jimmy while two deputies dusted for fingerprints and took pictures. Maury Green stood quietly in the background, throwing a puzzled look at Jimmy from time to time.

What had brought them to Green’s Mortuary?

Jimmy took that one, reciting the encephalitis story.

Did old Doc Reardon know about it?

Well, no. Jimmy thought it would be best to make a quiet check before mentioning it to anyone. Doc Reardon had been known to be, well, overly chatty on occasion.

What about this encephawhatzis? Did the woman have it?

No, almost certainly not. He had finished his examination before the man in the CPO coat burst in. He (Jimmy) would not be willing—or able—to state just how the woman had died, but it certainly wasn’t of encephalitis.

Could they describe this fella?

They answered in terms of the story they had worked out. Ben added a pair of brown work boots just so they wouldn’t sound too much like Tweedledum and Tweedledee.

McCaslin asked a few more questions, and Ben was just beginning to feel that they were going to get out of it unscathed when McCaslin turned to him and asked:

“What are you doing in this, Mears? You ain’t no doctor.”

His watchful eyes twinkled benignly. Jimmy opened his mouth to answer, but the sheriff quieted him with a single hand gesture.

If the purpose of McCaslin’s sudden shot had been to startle Ben into a guilty expression or gesture, it failed. He was too emotionally wrung out to react much. Being caught in a misstatement did not seem too shattering after what had gone before. “I’m a writer, not a doctor. I write novels. I’m writing one currently where one of the important secondary characters is a mortician’s son. I just wanted a look into the back room. I hitched a ride with Jimmy here. He told me he would rather not reveal his business, and I didn’t ask.” He rubbed his chin, where a small, knotted bump had risen. “I got more than I bargained for.”

McCaslin looked neither pleased nor disappointed in Ben’s answer. “I should say you did. You’re the fella that wrote Conway’s Daughter, ain’t you?”

“Yes.”

“My wife read part of that in some woman’s magazine. Cosmopolitan, I think. Laughed like hell. I took a look and couldn’t see nothing funny in a little girl strung out on drugs.”

“No,” Ben said, looking McCaslin in the eye. “I didn’t see anything funny about it, either.”

“This new book the one they say you been workin’ on up to the Lot?”

“Yes.”

“P’raps, you’d like Moe Green here to read it over,” McCaslin remarked. “See if you got the undertakin’ parts right.”

“That section isn’t written yet,” Ben said. “I always research before I write. It’s easier.”

McCaslin shook his head wonderingly. “You know, your story sounds just like one of those Fu Manchu books. Some guy breaks in here an’ overpowers two strong men an’ makes off with the body of some poor woman who died of unknown causes.”

“Listen, Homer—” Jimmy began.

“Don’t you Homer me,” McCaslin said. “I don’t like it. I don’t like any part of it. This encephalitis is catchin’, ain’t it?”

“Yes, it’s infectious,” Jimmy said warily.

“An’ you still brought this writer along? Knowin’ she might be infected with somethin’ like that?”

Jimmy shrugged and looked angry. “I don’t question your professional judgments, Sheriff. You’ll just have to bear with mine. Encephalitis is a fairly low-grade infection which gains slowly in the human bloodstream. I felt there would be no danger to either of us. Now, wouldn’t you be better off trying to find out who carted away Mrs Glick’s body—Fu Manchu or otherwise—or are you just having fun questioning us?”

McCaslin fetched a deep sigh from his not inconsiderable belly, flipped his notebook closed, and stored it in the depths of his hip pocket again. “Well, we’ll put the word out, Jimmy. Doubt if we’ll get much on this unless the kook comes out of the woodwork again—if there ever was a kook, which I doubt.”

Jimmy raised his eyebrows.

“You’re lyin’ to me,” McCaslin said patiently. “I know it, these deputies know it, prob’ly even ole Moe knows it. I don’t know how much you’re lyin’—a little or a lot—but I know I can’t prove you’re lyin’ as long as you both stick to the same story. I could take you both down to the cooler, but the rules say I gotta give you one phone call, an’ even the greenest kid fresh out of law school could spring you on what I got, which could best be described as Suspicion of Unknown Hanky-panky. An’ I bet your lawyer ain’t fresh out of law school, is he?”

“No,” Jimmy said. “He’s not.”

“I’d take you down just the same and put you to the inconvenience except I get a feelin’ you ain’t lyin’ because you did somethin’ against the law.” He hit the pedal at the foot of the stainless-steel waste can by the mortician’s table. The top banged up and McCaslin shot a brown stream of tobacco juice into it. Maury Green jumped. “Would either of you like to sort of revise your story?” he asked quietly, and the backcountry twang was gone from his voice. “This is serious business. We’ve had four deaths in the Lot, and all four bodies are gone. I want to know what’s happening.”

“We’ve told you everything we know,” Jimmy said with quiet firmness. He looked directly at McCaslin. “If we could tell you more, we would.”

McCaslin looked back at him, just as keenly. “You’re scared shitless,” he said. “You and this writer, both of you. You look the way some of the guys in Korea looked when they brought ’em back from the front lines.”

The deputies were looking at them. Ben and Jimmy said nothing.

McCaslin sighed again. “Go on, get out of here. I want you both down to my office tomorrow by ten to make statements. If you ain’t there by ten, I’ll send a patrol car out to get you.”

“You won’t have to do that,” Ben said.

McCaslin looked at him mournfully and shook his head. “You ought to write books with better sense. Like the guy who writes those Travis McGee stories. A man can sink his teeth into one of those.”


THIRTEEN

Ben got up from the table and rinsed his coffee cup at the sink, pausing to look out the window into the night’s blackness. What was out there tonight? Marjorie Glick, reunited with her son at last? Mike Ryerson? Floyd Tibbits? Carl Foreman?

He turned away and went upstairs.

He slept the rest of the night with the desk lamp on and left the tongue-depressor cross that had vanquished Mrs Glick on the table by his right hand. His last thought before sleep took him was to wonder if Susan was all right, and safe.





Chapter Twelve

Mark

When he first heard the distant snapping of twigs, he crept behind the trunk of a large spruce and stood there, waiting to see who would show up. They couldn’t come out in the daytime, but that didn’t mean they couldn’t get people who could; giving them money was one way, but it wasn’t the only way. Mark had seen that guy Straker in town, and his eyes were like the eyes of a toad sunning itself on a rock. He looked like he could break a baby’s arm and smile while he did it.

He touched the heavy shape of his father’s target pistol in his jacket pocket. Bullets were no good against them—except maybe silver ones—but a shot between the eyes would punch that Straker’s ticket, all right.

His eyes shifted downward momentarily to the roughly cylindrical shape propped against the tree, wrapped in an old piece of toweling. There was a woodpile behind his house, half a cord of yellow ash stove lengths which he and his father had cut with the McCulloch chain saw in July and August. Henry Petrie was methodical, and each length, Mark knew, would be within an inch of three feet, one way or the other. His father knew the proper length just as he knew that winter followed fall and that yellow ash would burn longer and cleaner in the living room fireplace.

His son, who knew other things, knew that ash was for men—things—like him. This morning, while his mother and father were out on their Sunday bird walk, he had taken one of the lengths and whacked one end into a rough point with his Boy Scout hatchet. It was rough, but it would serve.

He saw a flash of color and shrank back against the tree, peering around the rough bark with one eye. A moment later he got his first clear glimpse of the person climbing the hill. It was a girl. He felt a sense of relief mingled with disappointment. No henchman of the devil there; that was Mr Norton’s daughter.

His gaze sharpened again. She was carrying a stake of her own! As she drew closer, he felt an urge to laugh bitterly—a piece of snow fence, that’s what she had. Two swings with an ordinary tool box hammer would split it right in two.

She was going to pass his tree on the right. As she drew closer, he began to slide carefully around his tree to the left, avoiding any small twigs that might pop and give him away. At last the synchronized little movement was done; her back was to him as she went on up the hill toward the break in the trees. She was going very carefully, he noted with approval. That was good. In spite of the silly snow fence stake, she apparently had some idea of what she was getting into. Still, if she went much further, she was going to be in trouble. Straker was at home. Mark had been here since twelve-thirty, and he had seen Straker go out to the driveway and look down the road and then go back into the house. Mark had been trying to make up his mind on what to do himself when this girl had entered things, upsetting the equation.

Perhaps she was going to be all right. She had stopped behind a screen of bushes and was crouching there, just looking at the house. Mark turned it over in his mind. Obviously she knew. How didn’t matter, but she would not have had even that pitiful stake with her if she didn’t know. He supposed he would have to go up and warn her that Straker was still around, and on guard. She probably didn’t have a gun, not even a little one like his.

He was pondering how to make his presence known to her without having her scream her head off when the motor of Straker’s car roared into life. She jumped visibly, and at first he was afraid she was going to break and run, crashing through the woods and advertising her presence for a hundred miles. But then she hunkered down again, holding on to the ground like she was afraid it would fly away from her. She’s got guts even if she is stupid, he thought approvingly.

Straker’s car backed down the driveway—she would have a much better view from where she was; he could only see the Packard’s black roof—hesitated for a moment, and then went off down the road toward town.

He decided they had to team up. Anything would be better than going up to that house alone. He had already sampled the poison atmosphere that enveloped it. He had felt it from a half a mile away, and it thickened as you got closer.

Now he ran lightly up the carpeted incline and put his hand on her shoulder. He felt her body tense, knew she was going to scream, and said, “Don’t yell. It’s all right. It’s me.”

She didn’t scream. What escaped was a terrified exhalation of air. She turned around and looked at him, her face white. “W-Who’s me?”

He sat down beside her. “My name is Mark Petrie. I know you; you’re Sue Norton. My dad knows your dad.”

“Petrie…? Henry Petrie?”

“Yes, that’s my father.”

“What are you doing here?” Her eyes were moving continually over him, as if she hadn’t been able to take in his actuality yet.

“The same thing you are. Only that stake won’t work. It’s too…” He groped for a word that had checked into his vocabulary through sight and definition but not by use. “It’s too flimsy.”

She looked down at her piece of snow fence and actually blushed. “Oh, that. Well, I found that in the woods and…and thought someone might fall over it, so I just—”

He cut her adult temporizing short impatiently: “You came to kill the vampire, didn’t you?”

“Wherever did you get that idea? Vampires and things like that?”

He said somberly, “A vampire tried to get me last night. It almost did, too.”

“That’s absurd. A big boy like you should know better than to make up—”

“It was Danny Glick.”

She recoiled, her eyes wincing as if he had thrown a mock punch instead of words. She groped out, found his arm, and held it. Their eyes locked. “Are you making this up, Mark?”

“No,” he said, and told his story in a few simple sentences.

“And you came here alone?” she asked when he had finished. “You believed it and came up here alone?”

“Believed it?” He looked at her, honestly puzzled. “Sure I believed it. I saw it, didn’t I?”

There was no response to that, and suddenly she was ashamed of her instant doubt (no, doubt was too kind a word) of Matt’s story and of Ben’s tentative acceptance.

“How come you’re here?”

She hesitated a moment and then said, “There are some men in town who suspect that there is a man in that house whom no one has seen. That he might be a…a…” Still she could not say the word, but he nodded his understanding. Even on short acquaintance, he seemed quite an extraordinary little boy.

Abridging all that she might have added, she said simply, “So I came to look and find out.”

He nodded at the stake. “And brought that to pound through him?”

“I don’t know if I could do that.”

“I could,” he said calmly. “After what I saw last night. Danny was outside my window, holding on like a great big fly. And his teeth…” He shook his head, dismissing the nightmare as a businessman might dismiss a bankrupt client.

“Do your parents know you’re here?” she asked, knowing they must not.

“No,” he said matter-of-factly. “Sunday is their nature day. They go on bird walks in the mornings and do other things in the afternoon. Sometimes I go and sometimes I don’t. Today they went for a ride up the coast.”

“You’re quite a boy,” she said.

“No, I’m not,” he said, his composure unruffled by the praise. “But I’m going to get rid of him.” He looked up at the house.

“Are you sure—”

“Sure I am. So’re you. Can’t you feel how bad he is? Doesn’t that house make you afraid, just looking at it?”

“Yes,” she said simply, giving in to him. His logic was the logic of nerve endings, and unlike Ben’s or Matt’s, it was resistless.

“How are we going to do it?” she asked, automatically giving over the leadership of the venture to him.

“Just go up there and break in,” he said. “Find him, pound the stake—my stake—through his heart, and get out again. He’s probably down cellar. They like dark places. Did you bring a flashlight?”

“No.”

“Damn it, neither did I.” He shuffled his sneakered feet aimlessly in the leaves for a moment. “Probably didn’t bring a cross either, did you?”

“Yes, I did,” Susan said. She pulled the link chain out of her blouse and showed him. He nodded and then pulled a chain out of his own shirt.

“I hope I can get this back before my folks come home,” he said gloomily. “I crooked it from my mother’s jewelry box. I’ll catch hell if she finds out.” He looked around. The shadows had lengthened even as they talked, and they both felt an impulse to delay and delay.

“When we find him, don’t look in his eyes,” Mark told her. “He can’t move out of his coffin, not until dark, but he can still hook you with his eyes. Do you know anything religious by heart?”

They had started through the bushes between the woods and the unkempt lawn of the Marsten House.

“Well, the Lord’s Prayer—”

“Sure, that’s good. I know that one, too. We’ll both say it while I pound the stake in.”

He saw her expression, revolted and half flagging, and he took her hand and squeezed it. His self-possession was disconcerting. “Listen, we have to. I bet he’s got half the town after last night. If we wait any longer, he’ll have it all. It will go fast, now.”

“After last night?”

“I dreamed it,” Mark said. His voice was still calm, but his eyes were dark. “I dreamed of them going to houses and calling on phones and begging to be let in. Some people knew, way down deep they knew, but they let them in just the same. Because it was easier to do that than to think something so bad might be real.”

“Just a dream,” she said uneasily.

“I bet there’s a lot of people lying around in bed today with the curtains closed or the shades drawn, wondering if they’ve got a cold or the flu or something. They feel all weak and fuzzy-headed. They don’t want to eat. The idea of eating makes them want to puke.”

“How do you know so much?”

“I read the monster magazines,” he said, “and go to see the movies when I can. Usually I have to tell my mom I’m going to see Walt Disney. And you can’t trust all of it. Sometimes they just make stuff up so the story will be bloodier.”

They were at the side of the house. Say, we’re quite a crew, we believers, Susan thought. An old teacher half-cracked with books, a writer obsessed with his childhood nightmares, a little boy who has taken a postgraduate course in vampire lore from the films and the modern penny-dreadfuls. And me? Do I really believe? Are paranoid fantasies catching?

She believed.

As Mark had said, this close to the house it was just not possible to scoff. All the thought processes, the act of conversation itself, were overshadowed by a more fundamental voice that was screaming danger! danger! in words that were not words at all. Her heartbeat and respiration were up, yet her skin was cold with the capillary-dilating effect of adrenaline, which keeps the blood hiding deep in the body’s wells during moments of stress. Her kidneys were tight and heavy. Her eyes seemed preternaturally sharp, taking in every splinter and paint flake on the side of the house. And all of this had been triggered by no external stimuli at all: no men with guns, no large and snarling dogs, no smell of fire. A deeper watchman than her five senses had been wakened after a long season of sleep. And there was no ignoring it.

She peered through a break in the lower shutters. “Why, they haven’t done a thing to it,” she said almost angrily. “It’s a mess.”

“Let me see. Boost me up.”

She laced her fingers together so he could look through the broken slats and into the crumbling living room of the Marsten House. He saw a deserted, boxy parlor with a thick patina of dust on the floor (many footprints had been tracked through it), peeling wallpaper, two or three old easy chairs, a scarred table. There were cobwebs festooned in the room’s upper corners, near the ceiling.

Before she could protest, he had rapped the hook-and-eye combination that held the shutter closed with the blunt end of his stake. The lock fell to the ground in two rusty pieces, and the shutters creaked outward an inch or two.

“Hey!” she protested. “You shouldn’t—”

“What do you want to do? Ring the doorbell?”

He accordioned back the right-hand shutter and rapped one of the dusty, wavy panes of glass. It tinkled inward. The fear leaped up in her, hot and strong, making a coppery taste in her mouth.

“We can still run,” she said, almost to herself.

He looked down at her and there was no contempt in his glance—only an honesty and a fear that was as great as her own. “You go if you have to,” he said.

“No. I don’t have to.” She tried to swallow away the obstruction in her throat and succeeded not at all. “Hurry it up. You’re getting heavy.”

He knocked the protruding shards of glass out of the pane he had broken, switched the stake to his other hand, then reached through and unlatched the window. It moaned slightly as he pushed it up, and then the way was open.

She let him down and they looked wordlessly at the window for a moment. Then Susan stepped forward, pushed the right-hand shutter open all the way, and put her hands on the splintery windowsill preparatory to boosting herself up. The fear in her was sickening with its greatness, settled in her belly like a horrid pregnancy. At last, she understood how Matt Burke had felt as he had gone up the stairs to whatever waited in his guest room.

She had always consciously or unconsciously formed fear into a simple equation: fears = unknown. And to solve the equation, one simply reduced the problem to simple algebraic terms, thus: unknown = creaky board (or whatever), creaky board = nothing to be afraid of. In the modern world all terrors could be gutted by simple use of the transitive axiom of equality. Some fears were justified, of course (you don’t drive when you’re too plowed to see, don’t extend the hand of friendship to snarling dogs, don’t go parking with boys you don’t know—how did the old joke go? Screw or walk?), but until now she had not believed that some fears were larger than comprehension, apocalyptic and nearly paralyzing. This equation was insoluble. The act of moving forward at all became heroism.

She boosted herself with a smooth flex of muscles, swung one leg over the sill, and then dropped to the dusty parlor floor and looked around. There was a smell. It oozed out of the walls in an almost visible miasma. She tried to tell herself it was only plaster rot, or the accumulated damp guano of all the animals that had nested behind those broken lathings—woodchucks, rats, perhaps even a raccoon or two. But it was more. The smell was deeper than animal-stink, more entrenched. It made her think of tears and vomit and blackness.

“Hey,” Mark called softly. His hands waved above the windowsill. “A little help.”

She leaned out, caught him under the armpits, and dragged him up until he had caught a grip on the windowsill. Then he jackknifed himself in neatly. His sneakered feet thumped the carpet, and then the house was still again.

They found themselves listening to the silence, fascinated by it. There did not even seem to be the faint, high hum that comes in utter stillness, the sound of nerve endings idling in neutral. There was only a great dead soundlessness and the beat of blood in their own ears.

And yet they both knew, of course. They were not alone.


TWO

“Come on,” he said. “Let’s look around.” He clutched the stake very tightly and for just a moment looked longingly back at the window.

She moved slowly toward the hall and he came after her. Just outside the door there was a small end table with a book on it. Mark picked it up.

“Hey,” he said. “Do you know Latin?”

“A little, from high school.”

“What’s this mean?” He showed her the binding.

She sounded the words out, a frown creasing her forehead. Then she shook her head. “Don’t know.”

He opened the book at random, and flinched. There was a picture of a naked man holding a child’s gutted body toward something you couldn’t see. He put the book down, glad to let go of it—the stretched binding felt uncomfortably familiar under his hand—and they went down the hallway toward the kitchen together. The shadows were more prominent here. The sun had gotten around to the other side of the house.

“Do you smell it?” he asked.

“Yes.”

“It’s worse back here, isn’t it?”

“Yes.”

He was remembering the cold-pantry his mother had kept in the other house, and how one year three bushel baskets of tomatoes had gone bad down there in the dark. This smell was like that, like the smell of tomatoes decaying into putrescence.

Susan whispered: “God, I’m so scared.”

His hand groped out, found hers, and they locked tightly.

The kitchen linoleum was old and gritty and pocked, worn black in front of the old porcelain-tub sink. A large, scarred table stood in the middle of the floor, and on it was a yellow plate, a knife and fork, and a scrap of raw hamburger.

The cellar door was standing ajar.

“That’s where we have to go,” he said.

“Oh,” she said weakly.

The door was open just a crack, and the light did not penetrate at all. The tongue of darkness seemed to lick hungrily at the kitchen, waiting for night to come so it could swallow it whole. That quarter inch of darkness was hideous, unspeakable in its possibilities. She stood beside Mark, helpless and moveless.

Then he stepped forward and pulled the door open and stood for a moment, looking down. She saw a muscle jump beneath his jaw.

“I think—” he began, and she heard something behind her and turned, suddenly feeling slow, feeling too late. It was Straker. He was grinning.

Mark turned, saw, and tried to dive around him. Straker’s fist crashed into his chin and he knew no more.


THREE

When Mark came to, he was being carried up a flight of stairs—not the cellar stairs, though. There was not that feeling of stone enclosure, and the air was not so fetid. He allowed his eyelids to unclose themselves a tiny fraction, letting his head still loll limply on his neck. A stair landing coming up…the second floor. He could see quite clearly. The sun was not down yet. Thin hope, then.

They gained the landing, and suddenly the arms holding him were gone. He thumped heavily onto the floor, hitting his head.

“Do you not think I know when someone is playing the possum, young master?” Straker asked him. From the floor he seemed easily ten feet tall. His bald head glistened with a subdued elegance in the gathering gloom. Mark saw with growing terror that there was a coil of rope around his shoulder.

He grabbed for the pocket where the pistol had been.

Straker threw back his head and laughed. “I have taken the liberty of removing the gun, young master. Boys should not be allowed weapons they do not understand…any more than they should lead young ladies to houses where their commerce has not been invited.”

“What did you do with Susan Norton?”

Straker smiled. “I have taken her where she wished to go, my boy. Into the cellar. Later, when the sun goes down, she will meet the man she came here to meet. You will meet him yourself, perhaps later tonight, perhaps tomorrow night. He may give you to the girl, of course…but I rather think he’ll want to deal with you himself. The girl will have friends of her own, some of them perhaps meddlers like yourself.”

Mark lashed out with both feet at Straker’s crotch, and Straker sidestepped liquidly, like a dancer. At the same moment he kicked his own foot out, connecting squarely with Mark’s kidneys.

Mark bit his lips and writhed on the floor.

Straker chuckled. “Come, young master. To your feet.”

“I…I can’t.”

“Then crawl,” Straker said contemptuously. He kicked again, this time striking the large muscle of the thigh. The pain was dreadful, but Mark clenched his teeth together. He got to his knees, and then to his feet.

They progressed down the hall toward the door at the far end. The pain in his kidneys was subsiding to a dull ache. “What are you going to do with me?”

“Truss you like a spring turkey, young master. Later, after my Master holds intercourse with you, you will be set free.”

“Like the others?”

Straker smiled.

As Mark pushed open the door and stepped into the room where Hubert Marsten had committed suicide, something odd seemed to happen in his mind. The fear did not fall away from it, but it seemed to stop acting as a brake on his thoughts, jamming all productive signals. His thoughts began to flicker past with amazing speed, not in words or precisely in images, but in a kind of symbolic shorthand. He felt like a lightbulb that has suddenly received a surge of power from no known source.

The room itself was utterly prosaic. The wallpaper hung in strips, showing the white plaster and Sheetrock beneath. The floor was heavily dusted with time and plaster, but there was only one set of footprints in it, suggesting someone had come up once, looked around, and left again. There were two stacks of magazines, a cast-iron cot with no spring or mattress, and a small tin plate with a faded Currier & Ives design that had once blocked the stove hole in the chimney. The window was shuttered, but enough light filtered dustily through the broken slats to make Mark think there might be an hour of daylight left. There was an aura of old nastiness about the room.

It took perhaps five seconds to open the door, see these things, and cross to the center of the room where Straker told him to stop. In that short period, his mind raced along three tracks and saw three possible outcomes to the situation he found himself in.

On one, he suddenly sprinted across the room toward the shuttered window and tried to crash through both glass and shutter like a Western movie hero, taking the drop to whatever lay below with blind hope. In one mental eye he saw himself crashing through only to fall onto a rusty pile of junked farm machinery, twitching away the last seconds of his life impaled on blunt harrow blades like a bug on a pin. In the other eye he saw himself crashing through the glass and into the shutter which trembled but did not break. He saw Straker pulling him back, his clothes torn, his body lacerated and bleeding in a dozen places.

On the second track, he saw Straker tie him up and leave. He saw himself trussed on the floor, saw the light fading, saw his struggles become more frenzied (but just as useless), and heard, finally, the steady tread on the stairs of one who was a million times worse than Straker.

On the third track, he saw himself using a trick he had read about last summer in a book on Houdini. Houdini had been a famous magician who had escaped jail cells, chained boxes, bank vaults, steamer trunks thrown into rivers. He could get out of ropes, police handcuffs, and Chinese finger-pullers. And one of the things the book said he did was hold his breath and tighten his hands into fists when a volunteer from the audience was tying him up. You bulged your thighs and forearms and neck muscles, too. If your muscles were big, you had a little slack when you relaxed them. The trick then was to relax completely, and go at your escape slowly and surely, never letting panic hurry you up. Little by little, your body would give you sweat for grease, and that helped, too. The book made it sound very easy.

“Turn around,” Straker said. “I am going to tie you up. While I tie you up, you will not move. If you move, I take this”—he cocked his thumb before Mark like a hitchhiker—“and pop your right eye out. Do you understand?”

Mark nodded. He took a deep breath, held it, and bunched all his muscles.

Straker threw his coil of rope over one of the beams.

“Lie down,” he said.

Mark did.

He crossed Mark’s hands behind his back and bound them tightly with the rope. He made a loop, slipped it around Mark’s neck, and tied it in a hangman’s knot. “You’re made fast to the very beam my Master’s friend and sponsor in this country hung himself from, young master. Are you flattered?”

Mark grunted, and Straker laughed. He passed the rope through Mark’s crotch, and he groaned as Straker took up the slack with a brutal jerk.

He chuckled with monstrous good nature. “So your jewels hurt? They will not for long. You are going to lead an ascetic’s life, my boy—a long, long life.”

He banded the rope over Mark’s taut thighs, made the knot tight, banded it again over his knees, and again over his ankles. Mark needed to breathe very badly now, but he held on stubbornly.

“You’re trembling, young master,” Straker said mockingly. “Your body is all in hard little knots. Your flesh is white—but it will be whiter! Yet you need not be so afraid. My Master has the capacity for kindness. He is much loved, right here in your own town. There is only a little sting, like the doctor’s needle, and then sweetness. And later on you will be let free. You will go see your mother and father, yes? You will see them after they sleep.”

He stood up and looked down at Mark benignly. “I will say good-by for a bit now, young master. Your lovely consort is to be made comfortable. When we meet again, you will like me better.”

He left, slamming the door behind him. A key rattled in the lock. And as his feet descended the stairs, Mark let out his breath and relaxed his muscles with a great, whooping sigh.

The ropes holding him loosened—a little.

He lay moveless, collecting himself. His mind was still flying with that same unnatural, exhilarating speed. From his position, he looked across the swelled, uneven floor to the iron cot frame. He could see the wall beyond it. The wallpaper was peeled away from that section and lay beneath the cot frame like a discarded snakeskin. He focused on a small section of the wall and examined it closely. He flushed everything else from his mind. The book on Houdini said that concentration was all-important. No fear or taint of panic must be allowed in the mind. The body must be completely relaxed. And the escape must take place in the mind before a single finger did so much as twitch. Every step must exist concretely in the mind.

He looked at the wall, and minutes passed.

The wall was white and bumpy, like an old drive-in movie screen. Eventually, as his body relaxed to its greatest degree, he began to see himself projected there, a small boy wearing a blue T-shirt and Levi’s jeans. The boy was on his side, arms pulled behind him, wrists nestling the small of the back above the buttocks. A noose looped around his neck, and any hard struggling would tighten that running slipknot inexorably until enough air was cut off to black out the brain.

He looked at the wall.

The figure there had begun to move cautiously, although he himself lay perfectly still. He watched all the movements of the simulacrum raptly. He had achieved a level of concentration necessary to the Indian fakirs and yogis, who are able to contemplate their toes or the tips of their noses for days, the state of certain mediums who levitate tables in a state of unconsciousness or extrude long tendrils of teleplasm from the nose, the mouth, the fingertips. His state was close to sublime. He did not think of Straker or the fading daylight. He no longer saw the gritty floor, the cot frame, or even the wall. He only saw the boy, a perfect figure which went through a tiny dance of carefully controlled muscles.

He looked at the wall.

And at last he began to move his wrists in half circles, toward each other. At the limit of each half circle, the thumb sides of his palms touched. No muscles moved but those in his lower forearms. He did not hurry. He looked at the wall.

As sweat rose through his pores, his wrists began to turn more freely. The half circles became three-quarters. At the limit of each, the backs of his hands pressed together. The loops holding them had loosened a tiny bit more.

He stopped.

After a moment had passed, he began to flex his thumbs against his palms and press his fingers together in a wriggling motion. His face was utterly expressionless, the plaster face of a department store dummy.

Five minutes passed. His hands were sweating freely now. The extreme level of his concentration had put him in partial control of his own sympathetic nervous system, another device of yogis and fakirs, and he had, unknowingly, gained some control over his body’s involuntary functions. More sweat trickled from his pores than his careful movements could account for. His hands had become oily. Droplets fell from his forehead, darkening the white dust on the floor.

He began to move his arms in an up-and-down piston motion, using his biceps and back muscles now. The noose tightened a little, but he could feel one of the loops holding his hands beginning to drag lower on his right palm. It was sticking against the pad of the thumb now, and that was all. Excitement shot through him and he stopped at once until the emotion had passed away completely. When it had, he began again. Up-down. Up-down. Up-down. He gained an eighth of an inch at a time. And suddenly, shockingly, his right hand was free.

He left it where it was, flexing it. When he was sure it was limber, he eased the fingers under the loop holding the left wrist and tented them. The left hand slid free.

He brought both hands around and put them on the floor. He closed his eyes for a moment. The trick now was to not think he had it made. The trick was to move with great deliberation.

Supporting himself with his left hand, he let his right roam over the bumps and valleys of the knot which secured the noose at his neck. He saw immediately that he would have to nearly choke himself to free it—and he was going to tighten the pressure on his testicles, which already throbbed dully.

He took a deep breath and began to work on the knot. The rope tightened by steady degrees, pressing into his neck and crotch. Prickles of coarse hemp dug into his throat like miniature tattoo needles. The knot defied him for what seemed an endless time. His vision began to fade under the onslaught of large black flowers that burst into soundless bloom before his eyes. He refused to hurry. He wiggled the knot steadily, and at last felt new slack in it. For a moment the pressure on his groin tightened unbearably, and then with a convulsive jerk, he threw the noose over his head and the pain lessened.

He sat up and hung his head over, breathing raggedly, cradling his wounded testicles in both hands. The sharp pain became a dull, pervading ache that made him feel nauseated.

When it began to abate a little, he looked over at the shuttered window. The light coming through the broken slats had faded to a dull ocher—it was almost sundown. And the door was locked.

He pulled the loose loop of rope over the beam, and set to work on the knots that held his legs. They were maddeningly tight, and his concentration had begun to slip away from him as reaction set in.

He freed his thighs, the knees, and after a seemingly endless struggle, his ankles. He stood up weakly among the harmless loops of rope and staggered. He began to rub his thighs.

There was a noise from below: footsteps.

He looked up, panicky, nostrils dilating. He hobbled over to the window and tried to lift it. Nailed shut, with rusted tenpennies bent over the cheap wood of the half sill like staples.

The feet were coming up the stairs.

He wiped his mouth with his hand and stared wildly around the room. Two bundles of magazines. A small tin plate with a picture of an 1890s summer picnic on the back. The iron cot frame.

He went to it despairingly and pulled up one end. And some distant gods, perhaps seeing how much luck he had manufactured by himself, doled out a little of their own.

The steps had begun down the hall toward the door when he unscrewed the steel cot leg to its final thread and pulled it free.


FOUR

When the door opened, Mark was standing behind it with the bed leg upraised, like a wooden Indian with a tomahawk.

“Young master, I’ve come to—”

He saw the empty coils of rope and froze for perhaps one full second in utter surprise. He was halfway through the door.

To Mark, things seemed to have slowed to the speed of a football maneuver seen in instant replay. He seemed to have minutes rather than bare seconds to aim at the one-quarter skull circumference visible beyond the edge of the door.

He brought the leg down with both hands, not as hard as he could—he sacrificed some force for better aim. It struck Straker just above the temple, as he started to turn to look behind the door. His eyes, open wide, squeezed shut in pain. Blood flew from the scalp wound in an amazing spray.

Straker’s body recoiled and he stumbled backward into the room. His face was twisted into a terrifying grimace. He reached out and Mark hit him again. This time the pipe struck his bald skull just above the bulge of the forehead, and there was another gout of blood.

He went down bonelessly, his eyes rolling up in his head.

Mark skirted the body, looking at it with eyes that were bulging and wide. The end of the bed leg was painted with blood. It was darker than Technicolor movie blood. Looking at it made him feel sick, but looking at Straker made him feel nothing.

I killed him, he thought. And on the heels of that: Good. Good.

Straker’s hand closed around his ankle.

Mark gasped and tried to pull his foot away. The hand held fast like a steel trap and now Straker was looking up at him, his eyes cold and bright through a dripping mask of blood. His lips were moving, but no sound came out. Mark pulled harder, to no avail. With a half groan, he began to hammer at Straker’s clutching hand with the bed leg. Once, twice, three times, four. There was the awful pencil sound of snapping fingers. The hand loosened, and he pulled free with a yank that sent him stumbling out through the doorway and into the hall.

Straker’s head had dropped to the floor again, but his mangled hand opened and closed on the air with tenebrous vitality, like the jerking of a dog’s paws in dreams of cat-chasing.

The bed leg fell from his nerveless fingers and he backed away, trembling. Then panic took him and he turned and fled down the stairs, leaping two or three at a time on his numb legs, his hand skimming the splintered banister.

The front hall was shadow-struck, horribly dark.

He went into the kitchen, casting lunatic, shying glances at the open cellar door. The sun was going down in a blazing mullion of reds and yellows and purples. In a funeral parlor sixteen miles distant, Ben Mears was watching the clock as the hands hesitated between 7:01 and 7:02.

Mark knew nothing of that, but he knew the vampire’s time was imminent. To stay longer meant confrontation on top of confrontation; to go back down into that cellar and try to save Susan meant induction into the ranks of the Undead.

Yet he went to the cellar door and actually walked down the first three steps before his fear wrapped him in almost physical bonds and would allow him to go no further. He was weeping, and his body was trembling wildly, as if with ague.

“Susan!” he screamed. “Run!”

“M-Mark?” Her voice, sounding weak and dazed. “I can’t see. It’s dark—”

There was a sudden booming noise, like a hollow gunshot, followed by a profound and soulless chuckle.

Susan screamed…a sound that trailed away to a moan and then to silence.

Still he paused, on feather-feet that trembled to blow him away.

And from below came a friendly voice, amazingly like his father’s: “Come down, my boy. I admire you.”

The power in the voice alone was so great that he felt the fear ebbing from him, the feathers in his feet turning to lead. He actually began to grope down another step before he caught hold of himself—and the catching hold took all the ragged discipline he had left.

“Come down,” the voice said, closer now. It held, beneath the friendly fatherliness, the smooth steel of command.

Mark shouted down: “I know your name! It’s Barlow!”

And fled.

By the time he reached the front hall the fear had come on him full again, and if the door had not been unlocked he might have burst straight through the center of it, leaving a cartoon cutout of himself behind.

He fled down the driveway (much like that long-ago boy Benjaman Mears) and then straight down the center of the Brooks Road toward town and dubious safety. Yet might not the king vampire come after him, even now?

He swerved off the road and made his way blunderingly through the woods, splashing through Taggart Stream and falling in a tangle of burdocks on the other side, and finally out into his own backyard.

He walked through the kitchen door and looked through the arch into the living room to where his mother, with worry written across her face in large letters, was talking into the telephone with the directory open on her lap.

She looked up and saw him, and relief spread across her face in a physical wave.

“—here he is—”

She set the phone into its cradle without waiting for a response and walked toward him. He saw with greater sorrow than she would have believed that she had been crying.

“Oh, Mark…where have you been?”

“He’s home?” His father called from the den. His face, unseen, was filling with thunder.

“Where have you been?” She caught his shoulders and shook them.

“Out,” he said wanly. “I fell down running home.”

There was nothing else to say. The essential and defining characteristic of childhood is not the effortless merging of dream and reality, but only alienation. There are no words for childhood’s dark turns and exhalations. A wise child recognizes it and submits to the necessary consequences. A child who counts the cost is a child no longer.

He added: “The time got away from me. It—”

Then his father, descending upon him.


FIVE

Some time in the darkness before Monday’s dawn.

Scratching at the window.

He came up from sleep with no pause, no intervening period of drowsiness or orientation. The insanities of sleep and waking had become remarkably similar.

The white face in the darkness outside the glass was Susan’s.

“Mark…let me in.”

He got out of bed. The floor was cold under his bare feet. He was shivering.

“Go away,” he said tonelessly. He could see that she was still wearing the same blouse, the same slacks. I wonder if her folks are worried, he thought. If they’ve called the police.

“It’s not so bad, Mark,” she said, and her eyes were flat and obsidian. She smiled, showing her teeth, which shone in sharp relief below her pale gums. “It’s ever so nice. Let me in, I’ll show you. I’ll kiss you, Mark. I’ll kiss you all over like your mother never did.”

“Go away,” he repeated.

“One of us will get you sooner or later,” she said. “There are lots more of us now. Let it be me, Mark. I’m…I’m hungry.” She tried to smile, but it turned into a nightshade grimace that made his bones cold.

He held up his cross and pressed it against the window.

She hissed, as if scalded, and let go of the window frame. For a moment she hung suspended in air, her body becoming misty and indistinct. Then, gone. But not before he saw (or thought he saw) a look of desperate unhappiness on her face.

The night was still and silent again.

There are lots more of us now.

His thoughts turned to his parents, sleeping in thoughtless peril below him, and dread gripped his bowels.

Some men knew, she had said, or suspected.

Who?

The writer, of course. The one she dated. Mears, his name was. He lived at Eva’s boardinghouse. Writers knew a lot. It would be him. And he would have to get to Mears before she did—

He stopped on his way back to bed.

If she hadn’t already.





Chapter Thirteen

Father Callahan

On that same Sunday evening, Father Callahan stepped hesitantly into Matt Burke’s hospital room at quarter to seven by Matt’s watch. The bedside table and the counterpane itself were littered with books, some of them dusty with age. Matt had called Loretta Starcher at her spinster’s apartment and had not only gotten her to open the library on Sunday, but had gotten her to deliver the books in person. She had come in at the head of a procession made up of three hospital orderlies, each loaded down. She had left in something of a huff because he refused to answer questions about the strange conglomeration.

Father Callahan regarded the schoolteacher curiously. He looked worn, but not so worn or wearily shocked as most of the parishioners he visited in similar circumstances. Callahan found that the common first reaction to news of cancer, strokes, heart attacks, or the failure of some major organ was one of betrayal. The patient was astounded to find that such a close (and, up to now at least, fully understood) friend as one’s own body could be so sluggard as to lie down on the job. The reaction which followed close on the heels of the first was the thought that a friend who would let one down so cruelly was not worth having. The conclusion that followed these reactions was that it didn’t matter if this friend was worth having or not. One could not refuse to speak to one’s traitorous body, or get up a petition against it, or pretend that one was not at home when it called. The final thought in this hospital-bed train of reasoning was the hideous possibility that one’s body might not be a friend at all, but an enemy implacably dedicated to destroying the superior force that had used it and abused it ever since the disease of reason set in.

Once, while in a fine drunken frenzy, Callahan had sat down to write a monograph on the subject for The Catholic Journal. He had even illustrated it with a fiendish editorial-page cartoon, which showed a brain poised on the highest ledge of a skyscraper. The building (labeled “The Human Body”) was in flames (which were labeled “Cancer”—although they might have been a dozen others). The cartoon was titled “Too Far to Jump.” During the next day’s enforced bout with sobriety, he had torn the prospective monograph to shreds and burned the cartoon—there was no place in Catholic doctrine for either, unless you wanted to add a helicopter labeled “Christ” that was dangling a rope ladder. Nonetheless, he felt that his insights had been true ones, and the result of such sickbed logic on the part of the patient was usually acute depression. The symptoms included dulled eyes, slow responses, sighs fetched from deep within the chest cavity, and sometimes tears at the sight of the priest, that black crow whose function was ultimately predicated on the problem the fact of mortality presented to the thinking being.

Matt Burke showed none of this depression. He held out his hand, and when Callahan shook it, he found the grip surprisingly strong.

“Father Callahan. Good of you to come.”

“Pleased to. Good teachers, like a wife’s wisdom, are pearls beyond price.”

“Even agnostic old bears like myself?”

“Especially those,” Callahan said, riposting with pleasure. “I may have caught you at a weak moment. There are no atheists in the foxholes, I’ve been told, and precious few agnostics in the Intensive Care ward.”

“I’m being moved soon, alas.”

“Pish-posh,” Callahan said. “We’ll have you Hail Marying and Our Fathering yet.”

“That,” Matt said “is not as far-fetched as you might think.”

Father Callahan sat down, and his knee bumped the bedstand as he drew his chair up. A carelessly piled stack of books cascaded into his lap. He read the titles aloud as he put them back.

“Dracula. Dracula’s Guest. The Search for Dracula. The Golden Bough. The Natural History of the Vampire—natural? Hungarian Folk Tales. Monsters of the Darkness. Monsters in Real Life. Peter Kurtin, Monster of Düsseldorf. And…” He brushed a thick patina of dust from the last cover and revealed a spectral figure poised menacingly above a sleeping damsel. “Varney the Vampyre, or, The Feast of Blood. Goodness—required reading for convalescent heart attack patients?”

Matt smiled. “Poor old Varney. I read it a long time ago for a class report in Eh-279 at the university…Romantic Lit. The professor, whose idea of fantasy began with Beowulf and ended with The Screwtape Letters, was quite shocked. I got a D plus on the report and a written command to elevate my sights.”

“The case of Peter Kurtin is interesting enough, though,” Callahan said. “In a repulsive sort of way.”

“You know his history?”

“Most of it, yes. I took an interest in such things as a divinity student. My excuse to the highly skeptical elders was that, in order to be a successful priest, one had to plumb the depths of human nature as well as aspire to its heights. All eyewash, actually. I just liked a shudder as well as the next one. Kurtin, I believe, murdered two of his playmates as a young boy by drowning them—he simply gained possession of a small float anchored in the middle of a wide river and kept pushing them away until they tired and went under.”

“Yes,” Matt said. “As a teenager, he twice tried to kill the parents of a girl who refused to go walking with him. He later burned down their house. But that is not the part of his, uh, career that I’m interested in.”

“I guessed not, from the trend of your reading matter.” He picked a magazine off the coverlet which showed an incredibly endowed young woman in a skintight costume who was sucking the blood of a young man. The young man’s expression seemed to be an uneasy combination of extreme terror and extreme lust. The name of the magazine—and of the young woman, apparently—was Vampirella. Callahan put it down, more intrigued than ever.

“Kurtin attacked and killed over a dozen women,” Callahan said. “Mutilated many more with a hammer. If it was their time of the month, he drank their discharge.”

Matt Burke nodded again. “What’s not so generally known,” he said, “is that he also mutilated animals. At the height of his obsession, he ripped the heads from the bodies of two swans in Düsseldorf ’s central park and drank the blood which gushed from their necks.”

“Has all this to do with why you wanted to see me?” Callahan asked. “Mrs Curless told me you said it was a matter of some importance.”

“Yes, it does and it is.”

“What might it be, then? If you’ve meant to intrigue me, you’ve certainly succeeded.”

Matt looked at him calmly. “A good friend of mine, Ben Mears, was to have gotten in touch with you today. Your housekeeper said he had not.”

“That’s so. I’ve seen no one since two o’clock this afternoon.”

“I have been unable to reach him. He left the hospital in the company of my doctor, James Cody. I have also been unable to reach him. I have likewise been unable to reach Susan Norton, Ben’s lady friend. She went out early this afternoon, promising her parents she would be in by five. They are worried.”

Callahan sat forward at this. He had a passing acquaintance with Bill Norton, who had once come to see him about a problem that had to do with some Catholic coworkers.

“You suspect something?”

“Let me ask you a question,” Matt said. “Take it very seriously and think it over before you answer. Have you noticed anything out of the ordinary in town just lately?”

Callahan’s original impression, now almost a certainty, was that this man was proceeding very carefully indeed, not wanting to frighten him off by whatever was on his mind. Something sufficiently outrageous was suggested by the litter of books.

“Vampires in ’salem’s Lot?” he asked.

He was thinking that the deep depression which followed grave illness could sometimes be avoided if the person afflicted had a deep enough investment in life: artists, musicians, a carpenter whose thoughts centered on some half-completed building. The interest could just as well be linked to some harmless (or not so harmless) psychosis, perhaps incipient before the illness.

He had spoken at some length with an elderly man named Horris from Schoolyard Hill who had been in the Maine Medical Center with advanced cancer of the lower intestine. In spite of pain which must have been excruciating, he had discoursed with Callahan in great and lucid detail concerning the creatures from Uranus who were infiltrating every walk of American life. “One day the fella who fills your gas tank down at Sonny’s Amoco is just Joe Blow from Falmouth,” this bright-eyed, talking skeleton told him, “and the next day it’s a Uranian who just looks like Joe Blow. He even has Joe Blow’s memories and speech patterns, you see. Because Uranians eat alpha waves…smack, smack, smack!” According to Horris, he did not have cancer at all, but an advanced case of laser poisoning. The Uranians, alarmed at his knowledge of their machinations, had decided to put him out of the way. Horris accepted this, and was prepared to go down fighting. Callahan made no effort to disabuse him. Leave that to well-meaning but thickheaded relatives. Callahan’s experience was that psychosis, like a good knock of Cutty Sark, could be extremely beneficial.

So now he simply folded his hands and waited for Matt to continue.

Matt said, “It’s difficult to proceed as it is. It’s going to be more difficult still if you think I’m suffering from sickbed dementia.”

Startled by hearing his thoughts expressed just as he had finished thinking them, Callahan kept his poker face only with difficulty—although the emotion that would have come through would not have been disquiet but admiration.

“On the contrary, you seem extremely lucid,” he said.

Matt sighed. “Lucidity doesn’t presuppose sanity—as you well know.” He shifted in bed, redistributing the books that lay around him. “If there is a God, He must be making me do penance for a life of careful academicism—of refusing to plant an intellectual foot on any ground until it had been footnoted in triplicate. Now for the second time in one day, I’m compelled to make the wildest declarations without a shred of proof to back them up. All I can say in defense of my own sanity is that my statements can be either proved or disproved without too much difficulty, and hope that you will take me seriously enough to make the test before it’s too late.” He chuckled. “Before it’s too late. Sounds straight out of the thirties’ pulp magazines, doesn’t it?”

“Life is full of melodrama,” Callahan remarked, reflecting that if it were so, he had seen precious little of it lately.

“Let me ask you again if you have noticed anything—anything—out of the way or peculiar this weekend.”

“To do with vampires, or—”

“To do with anything.”

Callahan thought it over. “The dump’s closed,” he said finally. “But the gate was broken off, so I drove in anyway.” He smiled. “I rather enjoy taking my own garbage to the dump. It’s so practical and humble that I can indulge my elitist fantasies of a poor but happy proletariat to the fullest. Dud Rogers wasn’t around, either.”

“Anything else?”

“Well…the Crocketts weren’t at mass this morning, and Mrs Crockett hardly ever misses.”

“More?”

“Poor Mrs Glick, of course—”

Matt got up on one elbow. “Mrs Glick? What about her?”

“She’s dead.”

“Of what?”

“Pauline Dickens seemed to think it was a heart attack,” Callahan said, but hesitatingly.

“Has anyone else died in the Lot today?” Ordinarily, it would have been a foolish question. Deaths in a small town like ’salem’s Lot were generally spread apart, in spite of the higher proportion of elderly in the population.

“No,” Callahan said slowly. “But the mortality rate has certainly been high lately, hasn’t it? Mike Ryerson…Floyd Tibbits…the McDougall baby…”

Matt nodded, looking tired. “Passing strange,” he said. “Yes. But things are reaching the point where they’ll be able to cover up for each other. A few more nights and I’m afraid…afraid…”

“Let’s stop beating around the bush,” Callahan said.

“All right. There’s been rather too much of that already, hasn’t there?”

He began to tell his story from beginning to end, weaving in Ben’s and Susan’s and Jimmy’s additions as he went along, holding back nothing. By the time he had finished, the evening’s horror had ended for Ben and Jimmy. Susan Norton’s was just beginning.


TWO

When he finished, Matt allowed a moment of silence and then said, “So. Am I crazy?”

“You’re determined that people will think you so, anyway,” Callahan said, “in spite of the fact that you seem to have convinced Mr Mears and your own doctor. No, I don’t think you’re crazy. After all, I am in the business of dealing with the supernatural. If I may be allowed a small pun, it is my bread and wine.”

“But—”

“Let me tell you a story. I won’t vouch for its truth, but I will vouch for my own belief that it is true. It concerns a good friend of mine, Father Raymond Bissonette, who has been ministering to a parish in Cornwall for some years now—along the so-called Tin Coast. Do you know of it?”

“Through reading, yes.”

“Some five years ago he wrote me that he had been called to an out-of-the-way corner of his parish to conduct a funeral service for a girl who had just ‘pined away.’ The girl’s coffin was filled with wild roses, which struck Ray as unusual. What he found downright grotesque was the fact that her mouth had been propped open with a stick and then filled with garlic and wild thyme.”

“But those are—”

“Traditional protections against the rising of the Undead, yes. Folk remedies. When Ray inquired, he was told quite matter-of-factly by the girl’s father that she had been killed by an incubus. You know the meaning?”

“A sexual vampire.”

“The girl had been betrothed to a young man named Bannock, who had a large strawberry-colored birthmark on the side of his neck. He was struck and killed by a car on his way home from work two weeks before the wedding. Two years later, the girl became engaged to another man. She broke it off quite suddenly during the week before the banns were to be cried for the second time. She told her parents and friends that John Bannock had been coming to her in the night and she had been unfaithful with him. Her present lover, according to Ray, was more distressed by the thought that she might have become mentally unbalanced than by the possibility of demon visitation. Nonetheless, she wasted away, died, and was buried in the old ways of the church.

“All of that did not occasion Ray’s letter. What did was an occurrence some two months after the girl’s burial. While he was on an early morning walk, Ray spied a young man standing by the girl’s grave—a young man with a strawberry-colored birthmark on his neck. Nor is that the end of the story. He had gotten a Polaroid camera from his parents the Christmas before and had amused himself by snapping various views of the Cornish countryside. I have some of them in a picture album at the rectory—they’re quite good. The camera was around his neck that morning, and he took several snaps of the young man. When he showed them around the village, the reaction was quite amazing. One old lady fell down in a faint, and the dead girl’s mother began to pray in the street.

“But when Ray got up the next morning, the young man’s figure had completely faded out of the pictures, and all that was left were several views of the local churchyard.”

“And you believe that?” Matt asked.

“Oh yes. And I suspect most people would. The ordinary fellow isn’t half so leery of the supernatural as the fiction writers like to make out. Most writers who deal in that particular subject, as a matter of fact, are more hardheaded about spirits and demons and boogies than your ordinary man in the street. Lovecraft was an atheist. Edgar Allan Poe was sort of a half-assed transcendentalist. And Hawthorne was only conventionally religious.”

“You’re amazingly conversant on the subject,” Matt said.

The priest shrugged. “I had a boy’s interest in the occult and the outré,” he said, “and as I grew older, my calling to the priesthood enhanced rather than retarded it.” He sighed deeply. “But lately I’ve begun to ask myself some rather hard questions about the nature of evil in the world.” With a twisted smile he added, “It’s spoiled a lot of the fun.”

“Then…would you investigate a few things for me? And would you be averse to taking along some holy water and a bit of the Host?”

“You’re treading on uneasy theological ground now,” Callahan said with genuine gravity.

“Why?”

“I’m not going to say no, not at this point,” Callahan said. “And I ought to tell you that if you’d gotten a younger priest, he probably would have said yes almost at once, with few if any qualms at all.” He smiled bitterly. “They view the trappings of the church as symbolic rather than practical—like a shaman’s headdress and medicine stick. This young priest might decide you were crazy, but if shaking a little holy water around would ease your craziness, fine and dandy. I can’t do that. If I should proceed to make your investigations in a neat Harris tweed with nothing under my arm but a copy of Sybil Leek’s The Sensuous Exorcist or whatever, that would be between you and me. But if I go with the Host…then I go as an agent of the Holy Catholic Church, prepared to execute what I would consider the most spiritual rites of my office. Then I go as Christ’s representative on earth.” He was now looking at Matt seriously, solemnly. “I may be a poor excuse for a priest—at times I’ve thought so—a bit jaded, a bit cynical, and just lately suffering a crisis of…what? faith? identity?…but I still believe enough in the awesome, mystical, and apotheotic power of the church which stands behind me to tremble a bit at the thought of accepting your request lightly. The church is more than a bundle of ideals, as these younger fellows seem to believe. It’s more than a spiritual Boy Scout troop. The church is a Force…and one does not set a Force in motion lightly.” He frowned severely at Matt. “Do you understand that? Your understanding is vitally important.”

“I understand.”

“You see, the overall concept of evil in the Catholic Church has undergone a radical change in this century. Do you know what caused it?”

“I imagine it was Freud.”

“Very good. The Catholic Church began to cope with a new concept as it marched into the twentieth century: evil with a small ‘e.’ With a devil that was not a red-horned monster complete with spiked tail and cloven hooves, or a serpent crawling through the garden—although that is a remarkably apt psychological image. The devil, according to the Gospel According to Freud, would be a gigantic composite id, the subconscious of all of us.”

“Surely a more stupendous concept than red-tailed boogies or demons with such sensitive noses that they can be banished with one good fart from a constipated churchman,” Matt said.

“Stupendous, of course. But impersonal. Merciless. Untouchable. Banishing Freud’s devil is as impossible as Shylock’s bargain—to extract a pound of flesh without spilling a drop of blood. The Catholic Church has been forced to reinterpret its whole approach to evil—bombers over Cambodia, the war in Ireland and the Middle East, cop-killings and ghetto riots, the billion smaller evils loosed on the world each day like a plague of gnats. It is in the process of shedding its old medicine-man skin and reemerging as a socially active, socially conscious body. The inner city rap-center ascendant over the confessional. Communion playing second fiddle to the civil rights movement and urban renewal. The church has been in the process of planting both feet in this world.”

“Where there are no witches or incubi or vampires,” Matt said, “but only child-beating, incest, and the rape of the environment.”

“Yes.”

Matt said deliberately, “And you hate it, don’t you?”

“Yes,” Callahan said quietly. “I think it’s an abomination. It’s the Catholic Church’s way of saying that God isn’t dead, only a little senile. And I guess that’s my answer, isn’t it? What do you want me to do?”

Matt told him.

Callahan thought it over and said, “You realize it flies in the face of everything I just told you?”

“On the contrary, I think it’s your chance to put your church—your church—to the test.”

Callahan took a deep breath. “Very well, I agree. On one condition.”

“What would that be?”

“That all of us who go on this little expedition first go to the shop this Mr Straker is managing. That Mr Mears, as spokesman, should speak to him frankly about all of this. That we all have a chance to observe his reactions. And finally, that he should have his chance to laugh in our faces.”

Matt was frowning. “It would be warning him.”

Callahan shook his head. “I believe the warning would be of no avail if the three of us—Mr Mears, Dr Cody, and myself—still agreed that we should move ahead regardless.”

“All right,” Matt said. “I agree, contingent on the approval of Ben and Jimmy Cody.”

“Fine.” Callahan sighed. “Will it hurt you if I tell you that I hope this is all in your mind? That I hope this man Straker does laugh in our faces, and with good reason?”

“Not in the slightest.”

“I do hope it. I have agreed to more than you know. It frightens me.”

“I am frightened, too,” Matt said softly.


THREE

But walking back to St Andrew’s, he did not feel frightened at all. He felt exhilarated, renewed. For the first time in years he was sober and did not crave a drink.

He went into the rectory, picked up the telephone, and dialed Eva Miller’s boardinghouse. “Hello? Mrs Miller? May I speak with Mr Mears?…He’s not. Yes, I see…. No, no message. I’ll call tomorrow. Yes, good-by.”

He hung up and went to the window.

Was Mears out there someplace, drinking beer on a country road, or could it be that everything the old schoolteacher had told him was true?

If so…if so…

He could not stay in the house. He went out on the back porch, breathing in the brisk, steely air of October, and looked into the moving darkness. Perhaps it wasn’t all Freud after all. Perhaps a large part of it had to do with the invention of the electric light, which had killed the shadows in men’s minds much more effectively than a stake through a vampire’s heart—and less messily, too.

The evil still went on, but now it went on in the hard, soulless glare of parking-lot fluorescents, of neon tubing, of hundred-watt bulbs by the billions. Generals planned strategic air strikes beneath the no-nonsense glow of alternating current, and it was all out of control, like a kid’s soapbox racer going downhill with no brakes: I was following my orders. Yes, that was true, patently true. We were all soldiers, simply following what was written on our walking papers. But where were the orders coming from, ultimately? Take me to your leader. But where is his office? I was just following orders. The people elected me. But who elected the people?

Something flapped overhead and Callahan looked up, startled out of his confused revery. A bird? A bat? Gone. Didn’t matter.

He listened for the town and heard nothing but the whine of telephone wires.

The night the kudzu gets your fields, you sleep like the dead.

Who wrote that? Dickey?

No sound; no light but the fluorescent in front of the church where Fred Astaire had never danced and the faint waxing and waning of the yellow warning light at the crossroads of Brock Street and Jointner Avenue. No baby cried.

The night the kudzu gets your fields, you sleep like—

The exultation had faded away like a bad echo of pride. Terror struck him around the heart like a blow. Not terror for his life or his honor or that his housekeeper might find out about his drinking. It was a terror he had never dreamed of, not even in the tortured days of his adolescence.

The terror he felt was for his immortal soul.





Part Three

The Deserted Village

I heard a voice, crying from the deep:

Come join me, baby, in my endless sleep.

OLD ROCK ’N’ ROLL SONG





And travelers now within that valley

Through the red-litten windows see

Vast forms that move fantastically

To a discordant melody;

While, like a rapid ghastly river,

Through the pale door,

A hideous throng rush out forever

And laugh—but smile no more.

EDGAR ALLAN POE

“The Haunted Palace”





Tell you now that the whole town is empty.

BOB DYLAN





Chapter Fourteen

The Lot (IV)

From the “Old Farmer’s Almanac”:

Sunset on Sunday, October 5, 1975, at 7:02 pm, sunrise on Monday, October 6, 1975, at 6:49 am. The period of darkness on Jerusalem’s Lot during that particular rotation of the Earth, thirteen days after the vernal equinox, lasted eleven hours and forty-seven minutes. The moon was new. The day’s verse from the Old Farmer was: “See less sun, harvest’s nigh done.”

From the Portland Weather Station:

High temperature for the period of darkness was 62°, reported at 7:05 pm. Low temperature was 47°, reported at 4:06 am. Scattered clouds, precipitation zero. Winds from the northwest at five to ten miles per hour.

From the Cumberland County police blotter:

Nothing.
