

October 27, 1789.

Followed P. this Evening when he departed for Jerusalem’s Lot, keeping a safe Distance to avoid Discovery. The cursed Whippoorwills flock through the Woods, filling all with a deathly, psycho-pompotic Chant. I dared not cross the Bridge; the Town all dark except for the Church, which was litten with a ghastly red Glare that seemed to transform the high, peak’d Windows into the Eyes of the Inferno. Voices rose and fell in a Devil’s Litany, sometimes laughing, sometimes sobbing. The very Ground seem’d to swell and groan beneath me, as if it bore an awful Weight, and I fled, amaz’d and full of Terror, the hellish, screaming Cries of the Whippoorwills dinning in my ears as I ran through those shadow-riven Woods.

All tends to the Climax, yet unforeseen. I dare not sleep for the Dreams that come, yet not remain awake for what lunatic Terrors may come. The night is full of awful Sounds and I fear—

And yet I feel the urge to go again, to watch, to see. It seems that Philip himself calls me, and the old Man.

The Birds cursed

cursed cursed



Here the diary of Robert Boone ends.

Yet you must notice, Bones, near the conclusion, that he claims Philip himself seemed to call him. My final conclusion is formed by these lines, by the talk of Mrs Cloris and the others, but most of all by those terrifying figures in the cellar, dead yet alive. Our line is yet an unfortunate one, Bones. There is a curse over us which refuses to be buried; it lives a hideous shadow-life in this house and that town. And the culmination of the cycle is drawing close again. I am the last of the Boone blood. I fear that something knows this, and that I am at the nexus of an evil endeavor beyond all sane understanding. The anniversary is All Saints’ Eve, one week from today.

How shall I proceed? If only you were here to counsel me, to help me! If only you were here!

I must know all; I must return to the shunned town. May God support me!

CHARLES.

(From the pocket journal of Calvin McCann)



Oct. 25, ’50

Mr Boone has slept nearly all this day. His face is pallid and much thinner. I fear recurrence of his fever is inevitable.

While refreshing his water carafe I caught sight of two unmailed letters to Mr Granson in Florida. He plans to return to Jerusalem’s Lot; ’twill be the killing of him if I allow it. Dare I steal away to Preacher’s Corners and hire a buggy? I must, and yet what if he wakes? If I should return and find him gone?

The noises have begun in our walls again. Thank God he still sleeps! My mind shudders from the import of this.

Later

I brought him his dinner on a tray. He plans on rising later, and despite his evasions, I know what he plans; yet I go to Preacher’s Corners. Several of the sleeping-powders prescribed to him during his late illness remained with my things; he drank one with his tea, all-unknowing. He sleeps again.

To leave him with the Things that shamble behind our walls terrifies me; to let him continue even one more day within these walls terrifies me even more greatly. I have locked him in.

God grant he should still be there, safe and sleeping, when I return with the buggy!

Still later

Stoned me! Stoned me like a wild and rabid dog! Monsters and fiends! These, that call themselves men! We are prisoners here—

The birds, the whippoorwills, have begun to gather.



October 26, 1850.

DEAR BONES,

It is nearly dusk, and I have just wakened, having slept nearly the last twenty-four hours away. Although Cal has said nothing, I suspect he put a sleeping-powder in my tea, having gleaned my intentions. He is a good and faithful friend, intending only the best and I shall say nothing.

Yet my mind is set. Tomorrow is the day. I am calm, resolved, but also seem to feel the subtle onset of the fever again. If it is so, it must be tomorrow. Perhaps tonight would be better still; yet not even the fires of Hell itself could induce me to set foot in that village by shadow-light.

Should I write no more, may God bless and keep you, Bones.

CHARLES.

Postscriptum—The birds have set up their cry, and the horrible shuffling sounds have begun again. Cal does not think I hear, but I do.

C.

(From the pocket journal of Calvin McCann)



Oct. 27, ’50

5 AM

He is impersuadable. Very well. I go with him.



November 4, 1850.

DEAR BONES,

Weak, yet lucid. I am not sure of the date, yet my almanac assures me by tide and sunset that it must be correct. I sit at my desk, where I sat when I first wrote you from Chapelwaite, and look out over the dark sea from which the last of the light is rapidly fading. I shall never see more. This night is my night; I leave it for whatever shadows be.

How it heaves itself at the rocks, this sea! It throws clouds of sea-foam at the darkling sky in banners, making the floor beneath me tremble. In the window-glass I see my reflection, pallid as any vampire’s. I have been without nourishment since the twenty-seventh of October, and should have been without water, had not Calvin left the carafe beside my bed on that day.

O, Cal! He is no more, Bones. He is gone in my place, in the place of this wretch with his pipe-stem arms and skull face who I see reflected back in the darkened glass. And yet he may be the more fortunate; for no dreams haunt him as they have haunted me these last days—twisted shapes that lurk in the nightmare corridors of delirium. Even now my hands tremble; I have splotched the page with ink.

Calvin confronted me on that morning just as I was about to slip away—and I thinking I had been so crafty. I had told him that I had decided we must leave, and asked him if he would go to Tandrell, some ten miles distant, and hire a trap where we were less notorious. He agreed to make the hike and I watched him leave by the sea-road. When he was out of sight I quickly made myself ready, donning both coat and muffler [for the weather had turned frosty; the first touch of coming winter was on that morning’s cutting breeze]. I wished briefly for a gun, then laughed at myself for the wish. What avails guns in such a matter?

I let myself out by the pantry-way, pausing for a last look at sea and sky; for the smell of the fresh air against the putrescence I knew I should smell soon enough; for the sight of a foraging gull wheeling below the clouds.

I turned—and there stood Calvin McCann.

“You shall not go alone,” said he; and his face was as grim as ever I have seen it.

“But, Calvin—” I began.

“No, not a word! We go together and do what we must, or I return you bodily to the house. You are not well. You shall not go alone.”

It is impossible to describe the conflicting emotions that swept over me: confusion, pique, gratefulness—yet the greatest of them was love.

We made our way silently past the summer-house and the sundial, down the weed-covered verge and into the woods. All was dead still—not a bird sang nor a wood-cricket chirruped. The world seemed cupped in a silent pall. There was only the ever-present smell of salt, and from far away, the faint tang of wood smoke. The woods were a blazoned riot of colour, but, to my eye, scarlet seemed to predominate all.

Soon the scent of salt passed, and another, more sinister odour took its place; that rottenness which I have mentioned. When we came to the leaning bridge which spanned the Royal, I expected Cal to ask me again to defer, but he did not. He paused, looked at that grim spire which seemed to mock the blue sky above it, and then looked at me. We went on.

We proceeded with quick yet dread footsteps to James Boon’s church. The door still hung ajar from our latter exit, and the darkness within seemed to leer at us. As we mounted the steps, brass seemed to fill my heart; my hand trembled as it touched the door-handle and pulled it. The smell within was greater, more noxious than ever.

We stepped into the shadowy ante-room and, with no pause, into the main chamber.

It was a shambles.

Something vast had been at work in there, and a mighty destruction had taken place. Pews were overturned and heaped like jackstraws. The wicked cross lay against the east wall, and a jagged hole in the plaster above it testified to the force with which it had been hurled. The oil-lamps had been ripped from their high fixtures, and the reek of whale-oil mingled with the terrible stink which pervaded the town. And down the center aisle, like a ghastly bridal path, was a trail of black ichor, mingled with sinister tendrils of blood. Our eyes followed it to the pulpit—the only untouched thing in view. Atop it, staring at us from across that blasphemous Book with glazed eyes, was the butchered body of a lamb.

“God,” Calvin whispered.

We approached, keeping clear of the slime on the floor. The room echoed back our footsteps and seemed to transmute them into the sound of gigantic laughter.

We mounted the narthex together. The lamb had not been torn or eaten; it appeared, rather, to have been squeezed until its blood-vessels had forcibly ruptured. Blood lay in thick and noisome puddles on the lectern itself, and about the base of it…yet on the book it was transparent, and the crabbed runes could be read through it, as through coloured glass!

“Must we touch it?” Cal asked, unfaltering.

“Yes. I must have it.”

“What will you do?”

“What should have been done sixty years ago. I am going to destroy it.”

We rolled the lamb’s corpse away from the book; it struck the floor with a hideous, lolling thud. The blood-stained pages now seemed alive with a scarlet glow of their own.

My ears began to ring and hum; a low chant seemed to emanate from the walls themselves. From the twisted look on Cal’s face I knew he heard the same. The floor beneath us trembled, as if the familiar which haunted this church came now unto us, to protect its own. The fabric of sane space and time seemed to twist and crack; the church seemed filled with spectres and litten with the hell-glow of eternal cold fire. It seemed that I saw James Boon, hideous and misshapen, cavorting around the supine body of a woman, and my Grand-uncle Philip behind him, an acolyte in a black, hooded cassock, who held a knife and a bowl.

“Deum vobiscum magna vermis—”

The words shuddered and writhed on the page before me, soaked in the blood of sacrifice, prize of a creature that shambles beyond the stars—

A blind, interbred congregation swaying in mindless, daemoniac praise; deformed faces filled with hungering, nameless anticipation—

And the Latin was replaced by an older tongue, ancient when Egypt was young and the Pyramids unbuilt, ancient when this Earth still hung in an unformed, boiling firmament of empty gas:

“Gyyagin vardar Yogsoggoth! Verminis! Gyyagin! Gyyagin! Gyyagin!”

The pulpit began to rend and split, pushing upward—

Calvin screamed and lifted an arm to shield his face. The narthex trembled with a huge, tenebrous motion like a ship wracked in a gale. I snatched up the book and held it away from me; it seemed filled with the heat of the sun and I felt that I should be cindered, blinded.

“Run!” Calvin screamed. “Run!”

But I stood frozen and the alien presence filled me like an ancient vessel that had waited for years—for generations!

“Gyyagin vardar!” I screamed. “Servant of Yogsoggoth, the Nameless One! The Worm from beyond Space! Star-Eater! Blinder of Time! Verminis! Now comes the Hour of Filling, the Time of Rending! Verminis! Alyah! Alyah! Gyyagin!”

Calvin pushed me and I tottered, the church whirling before me, and fell to the floor. My head crashed against the edge of an upturned pew, and red fire filled my head—yet seemed to clear it.

I groped for the sulphur matches I had brought.

Subterranean thunder filled the place. Plaster fell. The rusted bell in the steeple pealed a choked devil’s carillon in sympathetic vibration.

My match flared. I touched it to the book just as the pulpit exploded upward in a rending explosion of wood. A huge black maw was discovered beneath; Cal tottered on the edge his hands held out, his face distended in a wordless scream that I shall hear forever.

And then there was a huge surge of gray, vibrating flesh. The smell became a nightmare tide. It was a huge outpouring of a viscid, pustulant jelly, a huge and awful form that seemed to skyrocket from the very bowels of the ground. And yet, with a sudden horrible comprehension which no man can have known, I perceived that it was but one ring, one segment, of a monster worm that had existed eyeless for years in the chambered darkness beneath that abominated church!

The book flared alight in my hands, and the Thing seemed to scream soundlessly above me. Calvin was struck glancingly and flung the length of the church like a doll with a broken neck.

It subsided—the thing subsided, leaving only a huge and shattered hole surrounded with black slime, and a great screaming, mewling sound that seemed to fade through colossal distances and was gone.

I looked down. The book was ashes.

I began to laugh, then to howl like a struck beast.

All sanity left me, and I sat on the floor with blood streaming from my temple, screaming and gibbering into those unhallowed shadows while Calvin sprawled in the far corner, staring at me with glazing, horror-struck eyes.

I have no idea how long I existed in that state. It is beyond all telling. But when I came again to my faculties, shadows had drawn long paths around me and I sat in twilight. Movement had caught my eye, movement from the shattered hole in the narthex floor.

A hand groped its way over the riven floor-boards.

My mad laughter choked in my throat. All hysteria melted into numb bloodlessness.

With terrible, vengeful slowness, a wracked figure pulled itself up from darkness, and a half-skull peered at me. Beetles crawled over the fleshless forehead. A rotted cassock clung to the askew hollows of mouldered collar-bones. Only the eyes lived—red, insane pits that glared at me with more than lunacy; they glared with the empty life of the pathless wastes beyond the edges of the Universe.

It came to take me down to darkness.

That was when I fled, screeching, leaving the body of my lifelong friend unheeded in that place of dread. I ran until the air seemed to burst like magma in my lungs and brain. I ran until I had gained this possessed and tainted house again, and my room, where I collapsed and have lain like a dead man until to-day. I ran because even in my crazed state, and even in the shattered ruin of that dead-yet-animated shape, I had seen the family resemblance. Yet not of Philip or of Robert, whose likenesses hang in the upstairs gallery. That rotted visage belonged to James Boon, Keeper of the Worm!

He still lives somewhere in the twisted, lightless wanderings beneath Jerusalem’s Lot and Chapelwaite—and It still lives. The burning of the book thwarted It, but there are other copies.

Yet I am the gateway, and I am the last of the Boone blood. For the good of all humanity I must die…and break the chain forever.

I go to the sea now, Bones. My journey, like my story, is at an end. May God rest you and grant you all peace.

CHARLES



The odd series of papers above was eventually received by Mr Everett Granson, to whom they had been addressed. It is assumed that a recurrence of the unfortunate brain fever which struck him originally following the death of his wife in 1848 caused Charles Boone to lose his sanity and murder his companion and longtime friend, Mr Calvin McCann.

The entries in Mr McCann’s pocket journal are a fascinating exercise in forgery, undoubtedly perpetrated by Charles Boone in an effort to reinforce his own paranoid delusions.

In at least two particulars, however, Charles Boone is proved wrong. First, when the town of Jerusalem’s Lot was “rediscovered” (I use the term historically, of course), the floor of the narthex, although rotted, showed no sign of explosion or huge damage. Although the ancient pews were overturned and several windows shattered, this can be assumed to be the work of vandals from neighboring towns over the years. Among the older residents of Preacher’s Corners and Tandrell there is still some idle rumor about Jerusalem’s Lot (perhaps, in his day, it was this kind of harmless folk legend which started Charles Boone’s mind on its fatal course), but this seems hardly relevant.

Second, Charles Boone was not the last of his line. His grandfather, Robert Boone, sired at least two bastards. One died in infancy. The second took the Boone name and located in the town of Central Falls, Rhode Island. I am the final descendant of this offshoot of the Boone line; Charles Boone’s second cousin, removed by three generations. These papers have been in my committal for ten years. I offer them for publication on the occasion of my residence in the Boone ancestral home, Chapelwaite, in the hope that the reader will find sympathy in his heart for Charles Boone’s poor, misguided soul. So far as I can tell, he was correct about only one thing: this place badly needs the services of an exterminator.

There are some huge rats in the walls, by the sound.

Signed,

James Robert Boone

October 2, 1971.





Deleted Scenes

In Susan (I), after Ben and Susan depart before their date in the evening, the original manuscript reads:

And yet, the horror was on its way even then, and not so far distant: the horror was docking at Portland Harbor, only twenty miles away. Neither of them had mentioned the Marsten House, which brooded over the north end of town like the humped shoulders of some Gothic spinster, but either might have; it had been vacant for years—over twenty of them. The great forest fire of 1951 had burned almost to its very yard before the wind had changed, leaving it to stand at the lip of all that great charring.

It had stood more years, and still more: the FOR SALE sign had been replaced three times, and the last time it had been allowed to whiten in the sun until it was unreadable. Then a gale in the Fall of 1960 had ripped it completely away, leaving only the sheriff ’s NO TRESPASSING signs, which were replaced with machinelike regularity each Spring and Fall.

A full year ago, a new sign had been nailed up on the peeling boards beside the ramshackle front porch, and this sign said: SOLD.


In The Lot (I) after Ben Mears contemplates the Marsten House at 4 o’clock, King has the following passage:

He hung the towel over his shoulder, turned back to the door—and froze, staring out the window. Something was different out there, different than it had been yesterday.

Not in the town, certainly; it drowsed away the late afternoon under a sky of that peculiar shade of deep blue that graces New England on particularly fine days in late September.

He could look across the two-story buildings on Momson Avenue, see their flat, asphalted roofs, across the park where the children now home from school lazed or biked or squabbled, and out to the northwest section of town where Brock Street disappeared beyond the shoulder of that first wooded hill. His eye followed up naturally to the break in the woods where the Burns Road cut through, and to the Marsten House which sat overlooking the town.



The shutters were closed.

When he had come back to Momson [’Salem’s Lot], one of the things that had made him decide to stay and write the book that had been increasingly on his mind had been the close correspondence between his memory of the Marsten House and its actuality, twenty-four years later. It was still unpainted, still leaning and ominous and seemingly pregnant with awful things (and perhaps the suicide-murder perpetrated by Hubie Marsten was only the least of them) that had transpired within its walls. The upstairs windows were still like vacant eyes peering forth from under steep angled eaves like eyebrows—eyes that had been cataracted with patched and faded green shades. The glass in those windows had been long since broken with small boys’ stones, of course, but that added rather than detracted from the overall impression of idiot malignancy.

The shutters had always hung leaningly beside the windows, accordioned back and held with rusty eyehook latches. It seemed to Ben that they had been flakingly green in 1951 (the house itself had been a peeled and ruinous white), but now all the color was gone from them, and like the house, they were a uniform and weatherbeaten gray.

But they had been pulled shut.

He stood with the towel over his shoulder, looking out at it, not moving, feeling a crawl of fear in his belly that he did not try to analyze. He had thought occupancy could only destroy the fragile splice of child-memory and adult-reality that was so important to the book he was writing, unless it was his own occupancy—a thought that still made him feel fear-sick. The new owner would reshingle, or cut the lawn, or tear off the old ivy trellis and repaint. But the closing of the shutters in the daytime had added something unreckoned with, something he most emphatically didn’t like.


In The Lot (I), section 20 (11:59 PM), when Straker sacrifices the body of Ralphie Glick, King’s original passages read:

In the Burns Road cemetery, a dark figure stood meditatively inside the gate, waiting for the turn of time, for the instant of midnight when God hides His face.

“O my father,” the figure said, its voice soft and cultured, flavored with a faint and unidentifiable accent, “favor me now. Lord of Flies, Prince of Darkness, favor me now. Now I bring you spoiled meat and reeking flesh. Blood I bring, the water of life. With my left hand I bring it. Make a sign for me on this ground, consecrated in your name. I wait a sign to begin your work.”

The voice died away. A wind sprang up, gentle, bringing with it the sigh and whisper of leafy branches and grasses, and a whiff of corruption from the dump at the end of the road.

A blue light began to glow at the far end of the cemetery, and intensified. In its glow, the figure’s countenance was discovered: elderly, with sunken eyes, and strangely heavy, almost negroid lips. The hair, swept back from the forehead, was pure white.

The blue glow intensified, grew searing, and took on a hunched, shifting shape that seemed to stretch up and up, beyond the close and hemming horizon of trees, to the sky itself.

A Voice said: “What do you bring me?”

“This.”

The figure stooped, and then stood with the sleeping figure of a child in his arms.

“It is well.”

The figure bowed.

“Consummate your act, and grow strong.”

It became unspeakable.


The chapter Danny Glick and Others (which King originally had titled Straker) features the scene where Royal Snow and Hank Peters bring the crate with Barlow’s coffin down cellar of the Marsten House. In the first draft, there is no Barlow and Straker antique store and only one box is delivered. When Hank delivers the locks, he sees a rat on the table. The original passage features more rats. Grisly scenes of rats are not so frequent in the published novel:

The beam steadied. Hank sucked in breath and felt the room go hazy around him.

Rats.

Hundreds of them, possibly thousands, all of them massed in ranks and platoons at that elbow bend. Staring at him, their V-shaped upper lips lifted to show the sharp incisors beneath. Their eyes glared at him.

He panicked, threw the keys wildly on the table, and turned away, shambling into a run. Again that queer odor of putrefaction seemed to fill his nostrils, the smell of age and wet and rotting flesh. He had to get away from it.

His flashlight beam struck the box, and he would have screamed if he had had the strength. That was what was making that queer wooden thumping noise. It was rocking back and forth, and the wood seemed to be straining, bulging. As his eyes took it in, one of the aluminum bands split and flew upward, making a shadow on the wall like a clutching hand…

He ran.


In Danny Glick and Others, at the end of the chapter when the nurse finds Danny dead, there is another section with the doctor reporting on him, and the vampiric condition of Danny is revealed much earlier.

“Dead,” he said, and began to pull the sheet up over the oddly calm face.

Her hand stopped him. “Doctor?”

“Yes?” He blinked at her mildly. He was a thin, intense-looking resident named Burke, and he was losing his hair rapidly.

“Those scratches on his neck are gone.”

He looked. “Yes,” he said indifferently, and covered the face of Danny Glick with the sheet. “Healed, probably.”

“I thought he was alive,” she said, and gripped her elbows to restrain a very un-R.N.-like shiver. “I thought he got up and opened the window and fainted. He looks like a…a waxwork.”

“Really?” he said without interest, and turned away. “It’s a condition that sometimes predates rigor mortis. Known in the argot as mortician’s complexion.”

“God,” she muttered.

They went out.

Under the sheet, Danny Glick opened flat obsidian eyes and smiled. The teeth discovered by that smile were white and cruelly sharp.


After Ben and Susan make love in the park in Ben (II), they have a different discussion, a longer one, about the nature of the Marsten House and evil.

“The book?” she asked. “You were going to tell me about that before we were so sweetly interrupted.”

“The book is about what happened to me at the Marsten House,” he said slowly. “I can see it from my window. And the paperweight I use to hold down my manuscript is the snow-dome I had in my hand when I ran out of there.”

“Ben, that sounds morbid. Morbid as hell.” Her face was sober, and the flat glow of the streetlights milked her tan, making her look pallid.

“It is,” he said. “But didn’t I tell you writing was an act of exorcism? I’m writing this one out of my nightmares, and I wouldn’t mind if I milked that reservoir dry. You know, the other three books were all quite cheerful…Conway’s Daughter especially. They all had happy endings. Do you know what Brewster at the The New York Times said about the conclusion of Air Dance? ‘Ben Mears reminds one of a mentally regressive street-performer doing a tap-dance on the gallows of the American prison system.’”

“I thought it was lovely,” she said indignantly. “Just because you’re not willing to go around and cry doom like Camus or Salinger or John Updike—”

“Do you remember when those hoods shot John Stennis in Washington, D.C.?” he asked.

“Sure,” she said, puzzled by the abrupt change in direction.

“They held him up outside his house and after he handed over his wallet and watch, one of them said, ‘We’re going to shoot you anyway.’ Then they did it. That’s always haunted me. Or Capote’s book, In Cold Blood. I was nineteen when I read it, and the image of Perry Smith going around and blowing the Clutters’ heads off is as clear now as it was then. Can you imagine what it would feel like to be lying on the floor with your hands tied behind you and to see a man coming toward you with a shotgun, and knowing what he was going to do?”

“Ben, you’re giving me the creeps.”

“I’m sorry,” he said. “This is hardly the place, is it?” He gestured at the dark around them.

“Go ahead,” she said. “It’s very important to me.”

“Why?”

“Because it is to you.”

He looked over to the right, and there was the Marsten House. The shutters had been pulled back—they were closed all day, every day—and the light shone out of the downstairs windows in rectangles.

“Those are kerosene lamps, aren’t they?” he asked.

“Yes…I think so.”

“Do you ever wonder who is up there?” he asked.

“Everyone in town wonders.”

He laughed. “I suppose they do. I wonder if Mabel Werts has got the straight dope yet?”

She chuckled throatily. “If she did, my mother would have it, too. You can bet Mabel’s bending every effort, though.”

“The book is set in a town like Momson,” he said, “and the people are like Momson people. There is a series of sex murders and mutilations. I’m going to describe one of the crimes in progress, from beginning to end, in minute detail. I’m going to rub the reader’s nose in it. I was outlining that part when Ralphie Glick disappeared. That’s why…well, it gave me a nasty turn.”

“I can understand that. Ben, is it necessary to be so…so clinical about violence?”

“I don’t know,” he said honestly. “It does to me, in this book.”

“Suppose you encourage somebody to commit a similar crime?”

“Do you mean like the kid who saw Psycho and then ran out and killed his grandmother?”

“Yes, something like that.”

“I’d like to think he would have killed her anyway,” he said. “That’s brutal, I suppose. What I mean is I wish she hadn’t been killed at all, but since she was, I hope Hitchcock isn’t an accessory after the fact. You know, people used to argue that drugstore pornography, stuff like Beach Blanket Gang-Bang, encouraged sex crimes. Then the government did a study and said that was full of shit. Most sex criminals are Eagle scout types with severe repression problems—like the old inquisitors who used to stretch teenage blondes on the rack and run their hands all over their bodies, searching for witch’s tits and marks of the devil—then reaming out their vaginas with red-hot pokers. The kid who masturbates in the bathroom over a skin magazine doesn’t want to run out and rape a six-year-old and then cut her up. A shy, retiring bank clerk who has no sex outlets at all and who broods in his room night after night may.”

“In other words, if a man is going to do it, he’ll do it regardless.”

“I distrust generalizations like that,” he said. “If The Night Creature is published and six months later a series of crimes with the same M.O. crops up, I’d lose a lot of sleep. A writer who won’t take moral responsibility may be a good writer, but he’s a shitty human being in my book. And I think there are some writers who have made mistakes in judgment. In Airport, Arthur Hailey tells you how to make a suitcase bomb. There’s a lovely description of how to hot-wire a car in Texas Whirlwind, by Norman Sullivan. There are others, too.”

They had arrived at her house, and stood by the mailbox. The lights downstairs were on, shining out on the lawn, and looking in the front bay window, Ben could see Ann Norton rocking and knitting something.

“What’s the rest of it?” she asked.

“Well, the house. The guy who lives there is a recluse, has been for years. People start to suspect he’s the killer. They go up there and find out he’s hung himself in the upstairs bedroom. A note is found. I’m sorry, the note says. God forgive me for what I’ve done.

“The killings stop…for a while. Then they begin again. The town sheriff begins to think, you know, that the real murderer killed the old man and wrote the note to throw the scent. He gets a court order and the body is exhumed. But it’s gone.”

“It’s awful, all right,” she said.

“People begin to suspect something supernatural…even the sheriff can’t get the idea out of his mind. The book’s hero is a kid named Jamie Atwood. He goes up to the house because he wants to join the big kid’s club—”

“The hero is Ben Mears,” she said.

He bowed. “Every author makes a guest appearance in every book, Susan. There, that’s three generalizations about writers, and I told you that first day I’d only make one. That’s breach of promise.”

“Never mind that. What happens?”

“The old man is up there, awful and rotted, a real horror. Rope still dangling from his neck. It turns out in the end that the real murderer—the town librarian—killed the old man just as the sheriff thought, and then went one step further. Dug up the body, cut off the head, and—”

“Yes,” she said. “Ben, you’re like a stranger to me. Do you know that? I’m scared of you.”

“We’d all be scared if we knew what was swept under the carpet of each other’s minds,” he said. “Do you know what made Poe great? And Machen and Lovecraft? A direct pipeline to the old subconscious. To the fears and twisted needs that swim around down there like phosphorescent fish. That’s what I’m after. And I’m getting it.”

“Does Jamie live?” she asked.

“No,” he said softly. “He’s the mad librarian’s last victim.”

“Well I think that’s awful,” she said, sounding upset. “Where’s the redeeming social merit in all that?”

“I don’t know,” he said. “Where’s the redeeming social merit in Psycho?”

“We’re not talking about Psycho,” she said stiffly.

“True,” he said. “I don’t know about social merit—I’ve always thought that was a crock. Morality is the only way to judge art. Art that trades on what happens to be socially acceptable is only pop art, and who wants to spend their life painting pictures of soup cans, even if you can sell them for a thousand bucks a crack? I think The Night Creature is going to be an extremely moral book, at least by my own code. The portrait of the killer is drawn in blood. He’s the most detestable human being imaginable…he makes me a little sick just to write about him. But that isn’t the worth of the book. That’s not what I’m writing about.”

“Then what is?”

“The town,” he said, and his eyes gleamed. “The town and the madness that spreads over it and poisons it. I’m writing about mindless evil—the worst kind of all, because there’s no escape from it. No begging, no pleading, no logic will get you out of it. I’m writing about those hoods saying we’re going to shoot you anyway. About Perry Smith walking from room to room and shooting human beings as if they were chickens. About Charles Starkwether and Charles Manson and Charles Witman. I’m writing about the mindless violence that wants to rip all of our lives to pieces. Have you ever seen Lon Chaney in The Phantom of the Opera?”

“Yes; at B.U. It gave me nightmares.”

“Then you know the scene where the girl creeps up behind him while he’s playing that great organ and pulls the mask off and she sees what a monster he is…I want to do that. I want to rip the mask off and show people that the Grand Guiginol lives on the corner of your own street…and in your own house.”


At the end of The Lot (II), after we meet Donald Callahan and before the chapter on Matt, King has this section on the town, completely excised from the published novel:

The town slept.

The cities sleep uneasily, like paranoiacs who spend their days in fear and their exhausted nights fleeing crooked shadows to that final hotel room where, as Auden says, it has been waiting all the time under one naked lightbulb. Their sleep is marred by the rising screams of the squad-car sirens, by the endless neon, by taxis that cruise restlessly like yellow wolves. Their sleep is sweating, fearful, yet vital.

But the town sleeps like a stone, like the dead.

Shops stand closed and dark, and there are only two night-lights: the sign which says POLICE and the lighted circle around the Bulova clock in the small window of Carl Foreman’s Funeral Home. The clock hands stand at quarter of one.

Ben Mears slept, and the Nortons, and Hal Griffen, flat on his back with his mouth open, schoolbooks on his desk, untouched all the weekend which had so lately become Monday morning. Win Purinton slept, and his new puppy—given to him by the boys at the dairy—slept in Doc’s old basket in the pantry, with a two-dollar alarm clock tucked in beside him to ease the loneliness that even dogs can feel. Eva Miller slept in her widow’s bed, twisting laboriously through the night in a slow and subconscious dance of love; and above her, Weasel Craig slept the slow and heavy sleep of wine.

When you come from the city to the town you lie wakeful in the absence of noise at first. You wait for something to break it: the cough of shattering glass, the squeal of tires blistering against the pavement, perhaps a scream. But there is nothing but the unearthly hum of the telephone wires and so you wait and wait and then sleep badly. But when the town gets you, you sleep like the town and the town sleeps deep in its blood, like a bear.

Yet it did not sleep quite so completely as it had, because on the hill above town the lights shone from the Marsten House, as if the eye of the dark itself had opened and disclosed a fearful yellow pupil.


When Ben comes over for dinner at Matthew Burke’s house, right after mixing his bourbon and water, and before eating spaghetti, he speaks of his financial state with Matt.

…as Ben sat down in the steel-legged kitchen chair with his drink, he found himself telling Matt Burke what he had not even told Susan: his financial state, which was far from rock steady.

“Yeah,” he said, “Conway’s Daughter did all right; for somebody, anyway. I got an advance of $3,000 against royalties and another three in royalties. The publisher and I split 50–50 on the paperback sale and the movie option, which was picked up by Columbia—and then put back down again when they couldn’t get Robert Mitchum to play Conway.”

“50–50’s not usual, is it?” Matt asked, sitting down.

“No, but it’s not bad for a first novel, which usually dies in the road anyway. And considering I wasn’t agented, I thought I’d done pretty well. I came out with about eighteen thousand dollars, and I put half of it right into some safe stock. Which I’m now selling off, chunk by chunk.”

“But the other books—”

“Well, I got a good advance on Air Dance, and the advance sales were good. The contract was a hell of a lot better, too, but the critics gave it both barrels and it didn’t move very well after that. And just after it came out someone I—I liked a lot died, and I stopped noticing where the money was going for a while. I ended up in Las Vegas. I dropped the last of the advance money on number 16, red, and then rented a cabin in the most Godforsaken western California valley you ever saw. Didn’t see anybody for weeks at a time. Wrote Billy Said Keep Going in two months. Holt House, which published the first two, turned it down.”

Ben finished the rest of his drink, took a plate of spaghetti from Matt, and thanked him. He ladled sauce over it and twirled a forkful against his spoon. “Fantastic,” he said. “Mama mia.”

“But of course,” Matt said. “What happened then?”

Ben shrugged. “When the script finally got back to me, I was in Mexico, living it up. And all of a sudden I realized I couldn’t afford to live it up. I traded the Pontiac GT I’d bought after the paperback sale of Air Dance for the Citroën I’m driving now, and crept back across the border.

“That was what happened on the outside. Inside I was in shock. All my life I wanted to be a writer—not an author but a writer—and after I finally had it made, I started feeling it all slip through my fingers. I was in shock. Coming up through Texas on one of those long, straight stretches, I put the car up to ninety and started to feed the pages of Billy through the wing window. I had some crazy idea that I’d leave a trail of words all the way from the goddamn border to New York City, where I was going to throw my damn stupid editor out of his office window. After I’d fed about seventy-five pages, I suddenly came to my senses and hit the brakes with both feet…I left rubber for a quarter of a mile and damn near killed myself. I pulled over onto the shoulder and spent the rest of the day cruising back the way I came, picking them up. I got one hell of a sunburn, but I got all of them but six pages. I rewrote those in an El Paso hotel room and they’re in the book. Better, I think.”

“I haven’t read that one,” Matt said. “It’s still—”

“—on reserve at the library,” Ben finished for him, grinning. “Mrs Starcher told me. Susan hasn’t had a chance to read it and she claims it’s driving her nuts. Apparently it’s been in great demand since I came to Momson. No place else but here, anyway.” He laughed again, a sound that was almost a tuneless bark.

“You got it published, at any rate.”

“Yes, and the critics were a little kinder—although there was still plenty for them to pick apart, apparently. After Holt, Doubleday and Lippincott both turned it down before Putnam’s picked it up. I’m not sure how much they spent on promotion, but I’m sure you could have bought a bunch of bananas with it, if not the cereal to go with it.”

“It died?”

“Not immediately, in spite of all that. It sold a fair number of copies, but the paperback deal is pretty horrible. They’re promoting it sort of as a sequel to Conway’s Daughter even though the two books have absolutely nothing in common.”


Also in the chapter on Matt, there is a deleted scene in which Matt has a physical checkup with Dr Cody, and they discuss the Glick case and it is here that Matt mentions Dracula. This scene does not appear in the published novel but is referenced several times in it.

Matt’s doctor was Jimmy Cody, a boy whom he had had in English some ten years before. Then he had been a little heller, but he seemed to have grown up nicely in medical school. Even his pimples were gone.

He sat on Jimmy’s examining table and allowed himself to be poked and prodded and fingered while Jimmy asked him how things were going down at the old jail. Matt told him that things were fine; all the irons nicely hot and the manacles well-oiled.

Jimmy laughed. “You can put your shirt on, Mr Burke. You’ll go another forty before you even need an oil change.”

“That’s what they all say,” Matt told him, a little grumpily. He had confessed having some trouble with insomnia and Jimmy, referring to him by the old honorific of “Mr” all the time, had cheerfully refused to prescribe. Just wait, he told himself balefully, buttoning his shirt. Wait until you’re sixty, fellow, and the high point of your day is having a good crap for the first time in a week.

Aloud he said, “It’s a shame about Danny Glick.”

“Funny you should mention that,” said Jimmy. “I was at the hospital the night he died. Was called in for consultation, in fact. I was the Glicks’ family doctor.” He shook his head. “I’ve been thinking of writing the case up for one of the journals. Damn strange.”

“I don’t suppose you can talk about it.”

“You’re trustworthy enough,” Jimmy said. “Just keep away from Mabel Werts and Ann Norton, if you please. They’d be seeing natives with poison blowguns in the bushes.”

Matt laughed.

“The kid was found over by the window of his room. The nurse said he must have gotten up, opened it, and then collapsed. She called a doctor in—Dr Berry in fact—and Berry pronounced him dead. He noted a condition which is known somewhat unfairly as mortician’s complexion, and it’s not that rare, but…I examined Danny Glick the day before. He had an anemic condition, an acutely anemic condition.” Jimmy shook his head and twiddled his stethoscope absently. “It was bad enough so I had set up a series of tests for the big C.”

“Leukemia?” Matt asked.

“Yes—it was the only thing that fit. But I’ve never heard of a case of mortician’s complexion in conjunction with anemia. And rigor mortis was late and extremely shallow, which is a condition most common with people who are prone to hypertension—high blood pressure.”

“Did he have a previous history of anemia?”

“Hell, no! I gave him a physical myself when he went out for little league baseball. That also tends to make me think that the kid was maybe developing leukemia. The tests he was given when he was admitted show negative, but they were general diagnostic tests, not very conclusive. If the boy had lived one more day…” He trailed off for a moment. “Anyway, I’m in correspondence with three heavy heads in the area. If the condition has been noted before in pm leukemia patients, I think that will solve it. I still might write it up, though.”

He shook his head. “The mother and father went into hysterics when they saw him, and I can’t blame them. That kid didn’t look any more dead than, well, than you do. He looked ready to get right up and start shagging flies.”

“His father made that very clear at the funeral,” Matt said. “I don’t suppose Danny had any innocent-looking marks on his neck?”

Jimmy Cody had been rearranging medicine samples in a glass case, and now he looked around sharply.

“Why, now that you mention it, the boy did have a couple of small scratches just above the carotid vein. How did you know that?”

Matt smiled, although he felt a superstitious uneasiness in spite of himself, and felt the crawl of hard bumps up his forearms—somewhere a goose was walking across his grave. But he certainly was not going to show Jimmy Cody that feeling.

“It seems to me you have a little more technical literature to read, Jimmy. I recommend the public library. A man by the name of Bram Stoker described all of Danny Glick’s symptoms almost seventy-five years ago.”

“Are you kidding me?”

“I certainly hope so,” Matt said. “The name of the book is Dracula.”


In Chapter 8 (Ben [III]), there are several scenes which failed to make it to the finished book. Here are a few:

When he woke up, it was quarter after four. His body was beaded with sweat, and he had kicked the upper sheet away. Still, he felt clearheaded again. The events of that early morning seemed to be far away and dim, and Matt Burke’s fancies seemed no more than a harmless, antique whimsey.

Still, Mike Bush [Ryerson] was dead. That was a fact.

He went down the hall to the shower with a towel slung over his shoulder, and Weasel looked out of his room. His eyes were bleary, and he was holding a gallon jug of zinfandel red by the neck.

“Ben, how are you, buddy?”

“All right, Weasel.”

“Come on in an’ have a drink. Awful thing about Mike Bush. I knew his mom well. She was a lovely woman.”

“Maybe later, Weasel. I want to get a shower.”

“Sure, buddy. Say—”

Ben, who had gotten to the bathroom door, looked back over his shoulder.

“I heard ol’ Mabel Werts blabbing her jowls to Joe Crane when I was down to the store, an’ she was saying that maybe both Mike and that poor little Glick boy might have had some rare disease—”

“That’s bullshit, Weasel.”

“Yeah…still, you shower good, buddy. You never know what germs dead people have.”

Ben went in and shut the door. Undressing, he reflected that the telephone was the most primitive form of communication in a small town. The comment Matt Burke had made to Jimmy Cody had been enough to set the ball rolling. Like that game they played on rainy days when they were kids—Whisper. Start off with “Frankie Winchell has pimples” and by the time it got to the other side of the room you had “Francis Waylon is pregnant.” Parkins Gillespie whispers to his wife, his wife whispers to Ann Norton, Ann whispers to Mabel Werts, and Mabel sends it into the streets in a fright-wig.

He turned on the showerhead.



When he went downstairs, Eva said: “Matt Burke called about an hour ago. Wants you to call him back. He said there was no hurry.”

“Okay.”

Several of the oldsters who roomed at Eva’s were eating their supper at the table—beans and sardines—and asked him to sit down and tell them about Mike. Ben did, not because he wanted to tell his story again, but because he was curious to find how far the rumors had gotten.

“I heard they may throw a quarantine over us,” Grover Verrill said, holding a sardine by its tail for a moment before popping it into his toothless mouth.

“Where did you hear that?” Ben asked.

“Joe Crane was tellin’ it down at Crossen’s,” Grover said, and looked over at Vinnie Upshaw. “Ain’t you been down there today?”

“No; goddamn leg’s tighter’n a tick. May go down this evenin’.”

“Why would they want to throw a quarantine?” Mabe Mullican asked.

“They think he may have had one of them funny diseases,” Grover said. “The berryberries or Hong Kong mumps or some shit like that,” he added sagely.

“Think he mighta caught it off that Glick kid, do they?” Mabe asked.

“Well, as Joe told it—”

Ben slipped away to the phone in the hall and dialed Matt’s number. The other end was picked up after a single ring. “Hello? Ben?”

“Yes.”

“I talked to Carl Foreman.”

“What did he say?”

“Daniel Glick was cosmeticized, but not embalmed. The father wouldn’t allow it.”

“Which means he…” Ben suddenly became aware that he could be heard in the kitchen.

Matt mistook his reticence for the delicacy they had both shown when approaching the subject.

“It means that Danny Glick could be Undead. He could have sucked Mike Bush’s blood.” His voice rose a note. “We’re talking about vampires, Ben. And all the old legends say they can only be stopped by three things: sunlight, holy artifacts, or a stake through the heart. I don’t know about the others—perhaps the Torah would stop a Jewish vampire—but I suspect evisceration would substitute nicely for the stake. But Danny Glick was not eviscerated! He was not embalmed! He could be—”

“Settle down,” Ben said.

“Yes,” Matt said. “Yes, I’m sorry for that. Are there people close enough to hear?”

“Yes.”

“You’re coming over tonight?”

“Yes.”

“Good. Good.” The relief in Matt’s voice was nearly tangible. “Can you see how important it is that Mike Bush is given…everything?”

“Yes.”

“There’s another matter, too. Something I just thought of.”

“What?”

“Not over the phone. Will you be here…before dark?”

“Yes, okay.” Ben hesitated, and then said what had been on his mind. “I may bring Susan with me.”

“Do you mean tell her?”

“Is it a bad idea?”

“I don’t know…no, that might be all right. If you think it’s best, all right.”

“Okay,” Ben said. “Maybe I’ll bring her and the three of us can…can discuss things.”

“All right, Ben. I’m sorry if I sounded hysterical.”

“No, you didn’t. I’ll see you, Matt.”

“Okay. Good-by.”

“By.”

Ben hung up thoughtfully. The fears were not so distant or so curiously antique now. The word they had both avoided—even the night before—had been spoken.

Vampire.

From the German word wampyre, meaning devil. Night-creature, pallid as the moon. Seriocomic hero of a thousand poorly-photographed B-pictures, destined to their own nighttime living death at drive-in theaters across the United States. Mainstay of the comic books of the 50s, when Ben had grown up, and now of the 70s, when he had returned to the place of his growing-up.

Vampire.

Dweller in cold marble tombs and crypts of earth and stone. Propitiating its own legend, even in the face of cold science, thriving even in an age of rockets, computers, DNA analysis. Flittering into ten thousand bedrooms of the mind, where voluptuous teenage girls lay in the grip of nightmares with their nightgowns twisted above their alabaster thighs.

Vampire.

The old men—and Eva—were looking at him, but he hardly noticed them going out. The word clanged in his mind like a churchyard bell.


In the original ending to Susan (II), Count Barlow (who is called Sarlinov in the original manuscript) and Straker meet out near the end of town to discuss how the novel’s heroes had been faring.

The Deep Cut Road skirts the marshes to the southwest of the town’s center, and then winds crazily through a series of folded ridges and sudden, knife-cut dips, and here the country was so wild that even the ubiquitous trailers were left behind. It was here that the big fire of 1951 burned at its most feverish, destructive pitch, and the growth has come back and formed into fervid tangles and nightmare patterns which lurch over and under huge deadfalls like a drunkard’s stagger. This country continues for only five miles or so, but it is five miles of the wildest land in the area. Now, with much of the fall foliage dashed from the trees and the wildly-leaning trunks painted by the moonlight, the woods looked like nothing so much as a three-dimensional maze constructed by a madman.

At nearly midnight on that Friday night, a black Packard—either a ’39 or a ’40—was parked somewhere along this stretch of road, idling quietly. The exhaust drew a wavering line in the dark. A tall shadow—Straker—stood with one foot on the driver’s side running board, smoking one of his Turkish cigarettes.

Something stirred in the air, darker even than the pines that formed the scene’s backdrop. A large crow, or perhaps a bat. Its form seemed to shift, elongate, and change. For a moment it seemed oddly insubstantial, as if it might disappear altogether. And then there was a second shadow, standing beside the first.

“Our father has been kind,” Straker remarked.

“Be it ever so,” remarked the other. His hair was now a vigorous black, with the faintest speckles of gray at the temples. “Mr Ben Mears?”

“In the hospital.”

“And Mr Tibbits?”

“In the constable’s lock-up. Mr Bush will attend to him later.”

“Burke is out of the way?”

“Yes. Not dead, but also in the hospital. He had a heart attack.”

“It is sufficient. He had the most knowledge; and a certain…persuasiveness.”

“But no zealotry.”

“Ah, no.” The figure with the vigorous black hair laughed softly. He did not in the least look like Bela Lugosi or Christopher Lee. “No zealotry there.”

“Is Master Glick—”

“Master Glick is about his business. Yes. Yes, indeed.” The dark man laughed again.

Straker asked humbly: “Is it my time yet?”

“Almost, my good servant. It is almost time.”

“Our father is kind,” Straker said, and there was the faintest touch of resignation in his voice.

“Be it ever so.”

Together, in the darkness, they seemed to merge into a single shadow.


In The Lot (III), we have this scene of Ruthie Crockett being visited by Dud Rogers, and another of the McDougall baby visiting his mother.

Ruthie Crockett’s shortie nightgown had twisted up above her thighs, showing a darker patch at their juncture that had been there for less than two years. Her perfect adolescent breasts rose and fell slowly in her deep sleep.

It took a long time for the soft beating on her window to awaken her, and even then she never woke fully. It was in a dream that she saw the oddly cocked head and behind it the twisted, hunched back of Dud Rogers.

His eyes glittered over her, filling with the night-reality of her slumbrous vitality, so deep that even in deepest sleep no cool hint of mortality could touch it. Her breasts pressed against each other in milky curves at the bodice of her nightdress.

“Ruthie…please, Ruthie, let me in a minute. Let me in.”

And she, still dreaming of the boy who had just the previous evening parked with her and run his hands over her body until it seemed ready to shriek aloud with painful pleasure, seemed to see his clear face and his straight back instead of Dud’s, and as she slid the window open and held out her sleeping arms, the flame leaped up in her like coal oil splashed into an open hearth and his arms were around her and there were no negatives now, negatives were swept away, impossible. His lips found the soft column of her throat, and for a single, darkly enchanted moment, she could hear the soft and eager champing of his tongue against her skin, laving it, preparing it for some unknown and unexpected entry.

His teeth dented against her throat…paused…pierced.

Orgasm shook her. Fierce, alien, compelling beyond all compulsion. And again. And again. So, on and on, down dark hallways, until all thought of her flesh was lost, drowned in a sweet green singing that rose and rose, bearing her down into darkness, unbearable in its sweet repulsiveness.

In her dream, her son had come back to her.

She lay in her own bed again, because Roy had taken her home. He had driven her home heavily sedated, sitting on the far right-hand side of the front seat with her hands in her lap. Roy asked her if she would like something to eat. She said no thank you. Her eyes, moving listlessly around the dining nook of the trailer and the living room beyond, saw that all sign of the baby was gone: Playpen, toy basket, Raggedy Andy doll, the caterpillar, the high chair where she had tried to feed him back to life.

No thank you, she had said, I want to go to sleep.

And now in this dream Randy was scratching at the window and she rushed to let him in because it was night and cold and her baby boy was naked.

She opened the window and he crawled into her arms—never mind how he got up to that high window, it doesn’t matter in dreams—and nuzzled at her neck like a little puppy dog.

And he was cold, so cold—but alive, not like this morning. His eyes were open and they were so pretty that you could hardly look away from them and he had been cutting new teeth, too.

Come to bed, baby, cover up warm with Momma.

And as she pulled the blankets over them a heavy sweetness—fulfillment—came to her and it was all right again because this was real and the rest had been a dream.

But you’re so cold, she said, hugging Randy to her, and her body heat did not seem to bring any vitality to him.

Teeth, nuzzling her neck.

Is oo hungwy? Want Momma to fix oo a wittle snackie?

But too hard to get up. And surely she was meant to nourish her own, and let him grow strong. She was going to be a good mother from now on. Such a scare she had had!

Leaning back on her pillow, drowsing off, she gave her son suck. In a last moment of belated fright, of near reality, she glanced over at the mirror which ran the length of her dressing table and in the glimmering light saw her own ecstatic face, eyes burning with a dark love that verged on fanaticism, and her arms cradling—nothing.

Her eyes searched for him in the crook of the arm and found him, her son with his tiny body lying on the swell of her breast, his working mouth pressed to her throat.

I’m never going to hit you again, Randy, she thought, just before drowsing off.

Never again.
