SIX

It was midafternoon when Franklin Boddin and Virgil Rathbun drove up to the slatted wooden gate at the end of the Burns Road fork, two miles beyond Harmony Hill Cemetery. They were in Franklin’s 1957 Chevrolet pickup, a vehicle that had been Corinthian ivory back in the first year of Ike’s second term but which was now a mixture of shit brown and primer-paint red. The back of the truck was filled with what Franklin called Crappie. Once every month or so, he and Virgil took a load of Crappie to the dump, and a great deal of said Crappie consisted of empty beer bottles, empty beer cans, empty half-kegs, empty wine bottles, and empty Popov vodka bottles.

“Closed,” Franklin Boddin said, squinting to read the sign nailed to the gate. “Well I’ll be dipped in shit.” He took a honk off the bottle of Dawson’s that had been resting comfortably against the bulge of his crotch and wiped his mouth with his arm. “This is Saturday, ain’t it?”

“Sure is,” Virgil Rathbun said. Virgil had no idea if it was Saturday or Tuesday. He was so drunk he wasn’t even sure what month it was.

“Dump ain’t closed on Saturday, is it?” Franklin asked. There was only one sign, but he was seeing three. He squinted again. All three signs said “Closed.” The paint was barn-red and had undoubtedly come out of the can of paint that rested inside the door of Dud Rogers’s caretaker shack.

“Never was closed on Saturday,” Virgil said. He swung his bottle of beer toward his face, missed his mouth, and poured a blurt of beer on his left shoulder. “God, that hits the spot.”

“Closed,” Franklin said, with mounting irritation. “That son of a whore is off on a toot, that’s what. I’ll close him.” He threw the truck into first gear and popped the clutch. Beer foamed out of the bottle between his legs and ran over his pants.

“Wind her, Franklin!” Virgil cried, and let out a massive belch as the pickup crashed through the gate, knocking it onto the can-littered verge of the road. Franklin shifted into second and shot up the rutted, chuck-holed road. The truck bounced madly on its worn springs. Bottles fell off the back end and smashed. Seagulls took to the air in screaming, circling waves.

A quarter of a mile beyond the gate, the Burns Road fork (now known as the Dump Road) ended in a widening clearing that was the dump. The close-pressing alders and maples gave way to reveal a great flat area of raw earth which had been scored and runneled by the constant use of the old Case bulldozer which was now parked by Dud’s shack. Beyond this flat area was the gravel pit where current dumping went on. The trash and garbage, glitter-shot with bottles and aluminum cans, stretched away in gigantic dunes.

“Goddamn no-account hunchbacked pisswah, looks like he ain’t plowed nor burned all the week long,” Franklin said. He jammed both feet on the brake pedal, which sank all the way to the floor with a mechanical scream. After a while the truck stopped. “He’s laid up with a case, that’s what.”

“I never knew Dud to drink much,” Virgil said, tossing his empty out the window and pulling another from the brown bag on the floor. He opened it on the door latch, and the beer, crazied up from the bumps, bubbled out over his hand.

“All them hunchbacks do,” Franklin said wisely. He spat out the window, discovered it was closed, and swiped his shirtsleeve across the scratched and cloudy glass. “We’ll go see him. Might be somethin’ in it.”

He backed the truck around in a huge, wandering circle and pulled up with the tailgate hanging over the latest accumulation of the Lot’s accumulated throwaway. He switched off the ignition, and silence pressed in on them suddenly. Except for the restless calling of the gulls, it was complete.

“Ain’t it quiet,” Virgil muttered.

They got out of the truck and went around to the back. Franklin unhooked the S-bolts that held the tailgate and let it drop with a crash. The gulls that had been feeding at the far end of the dump rose in a cloud, squalling and scolding.

The two of them climbed up without a word and began heaving the Crappie off the end. Green plastic bags spun through the clear air and smashed open as they hit. It was an old job for them. They were a part of the town that few tourists ever saw (or cared to)—firstly, because the town ignored them by tacit agreement, and secondly, because they had developed their own protective coloration. If you met Franklin’s pickup on the road, you forgot it the instant it was gone from your rearview mirror. If you happened to see their shack with its tin chimney sending a pencil line of smoke into the white November sky, you overlooked it. If you met Virgil coming out of the Cumberland greenfront with a bottle of welfare vodka in a brown bag, you said hi and then couldn’t quite remember who it was you had spoken to; the face was familiar but the name just slipped your mind. Franklin’s brother was Derek Boddin, father of Richie (lately deposed king of Stanley Street Elementary School), and Derek had nearly forgotten that Franklin was still alive and in town. He had progressed beyond black sheepdom; he was totally gray.

Now, with the truck empty, Franklin kicked out a last can—clink!—and hitched up his green work pants. “Let’s go see Dud,” he said.

They climbed down from the truck and Virgil tripped over one of his own rawhide lacings and sat down hard. “Christ, they don’t make these things half-right,” he muttered obscurely.

They walked across to Dud’s tarpaper shack. The door was closed.

“Dud!” Franklin bawled. “Hey, Dud Rogers!” He thumped the door once, and the whole shack trembled. The small hook-and-eye lock on the inside of the door snapped off, and the door tottered open. The shack was empty but filled with a sickish-sweet odor that made them look at each other and grimace—and they were barroom veterans of a great many fungoid smells. It reminded Franklin fleetingly of pickles that had lain in a dark crock for many years, until the fluid seeping out of them had turned white.

“Son of a whore,” Virgil said. “Worse than gangrene.”

Yet the shack was astringently neat. Dud’s extra shirt was hung on a hook over the bed, the splintery kitchen chair was pushed up to the table, and the cot was made up Army-style. The can of red paint, with fresh drips down the sides, was placed on a fold of newspaper behind the door.

“I’m about to puke if we don’t get out of here,” Virgil said. His face had gone a whitish-green.

Franklin, who felt no better, backed out and shut the door.

They surveyed the dump, which was as deserted and sterile as the mountains of the moon.

“He ain’t here,” Franklin said. “He’s back in the woods someplace, laying up snookered.”

“Frank?”

“What,” Franklin said shortly. He was out of temper.

“That door was latched on the inside. If he ain’t there, how did he get out?”

Startled, Franklin turned around and regarded the shack. Through the window, he started to say, and then didn’t. The window was nothing but a square cut into the tarpaper and buttoned up with all-weather plastic. The window wasn’t large enough for Dud to squirm through, not with the hump on his back.

“Never mind,” Franklin said gruffly. “If he don’t want to share, fuck him. Let’s get out of here.”

They walked back to the truck, and Franklin felt something seeping through the protective membrane of drunkenness—something he would not remember later, or want to: a creeping feeling; a feeling that something here had gone terribly awry. It was as if the dump had gained a heartbeat and that beat was slow yet full of terrible vitality. He suddenly wanted to go away very quickly.

“I don’t see any rats,” Virgil said suddenly.

And there were none to be seen; only the gulls. Franklin tried to remember a time when he had brought the Crappie to the dump and seen no rats. He couldn’t. And he didn’t like that, either.

“He must have put out poison bait, huh, Frank?”

“Come on, let’s go,” Franklin said. “Let’s get the hell out of here.”


SEVEN

After supper, they let Ben go up and see Matt Burke. It was a short visit; Matt was sleeping. The oxygen tent had been taken away, however, and the head nurse told Ben that Matt would almost certainly be awake tomorrow morning and able to see visitors for a short time.

Ben thought his face looked drawn and cruelly aged, for the first time an old man’s face. Lying still, with the loosened flesh of his neck rising out of the hospital johnny, he seemed vulnerable and defenseless. If it’s all true, Ben thought, these people are doing you no favors, Matt. If it’s all true, then we’re in the citadel of unbelief, where nightmares are dispatched with Lysol and scalpels and chemotherapy rather than with stakes and Bibles and wild mountain thyme. They’re happy with their life support units and hypos and enema bags filled with barium solution. If the column of truth has a hole in it, they neither know nor care.

He walked to the head of the bed and turned Matt’s head with gentle fingers. There were no marks on the skin of his neck; the flesh was blameless.

He hesitated a moment longer, then went to the closet and opened it. Matt’s clothes hung there, and hooked over the closet door’s inside knob was the crucifix he had been wearing when Susan visited him. It hung from a filigreed chain that gleamed softly in the room’s subdued light.

Ben took it back to the bed and put it around Matt’s neck.

“Here, what are you doing?”

A nurse had come in with a pitcher of water and a bedpan with a towel spread decorously over the opening.

“I’m putting his cross around his neck,” Ben said.

“Is he a Catholic?”

“He is now,” Ben said somberly.


EIGHT

Night had fallen when a soft rap came at the kitchen door of the Sawyer house on the Deep Cut Road. Bonnie Sawyer, with a small smile on her lips, went to answer it. She was wearing a short ruffled apron tied at the waist, high heels, and nothing else.

When she opened the door, Corey Bryant’s eyes widened and his mouth dropped open. “Buh,” he said. “Buh…Buh…Bonnie?”

“What’s the matter, Corey?” She put a hand on the doorjamb with light deliberation, pulling her bare breasts up to their sauciest angle. At the same time she crossed her feet demurely, modeling her legs for him.

“Jeez, Bonnie, what if it had been—”

“The man from the telephone company?” she asked, and giggled. She took one of his hands and placed it on the firm flesh of her right breast. “Want to read my meter?”

With a grunt that held a note of desperation (the drowning man going down for the third time, clutching a mammary instead of a straw), he pulled her to him. His hands cupped her buttocks, and the starched apron crackled briskly between them.

“Oh my,” she said, wiggling against him. “Are you going to test my receiver, Mr Telephone Man? I’ve been waiting for an important call all day—”

He picked her up and kicked the door shut behind him. She did not need to direct him to the bedroom. He knew his way.

“You’re sure he’s not going to be home?” he asked.

Her eyes gleamed in the darkness. “Why, who can you mean, Mr Telephone Man? Not my handsome hubby…he’s in Burlington, Vermont.”

He put her down on the bed crossways, with her legs dangling off the side.

“Turn on the light,” she said, her voice suddenly slow and heavy. “I want to see what you’re doing.”

He turned on the bedside lamp and looked down at her. The apron had been pulled away to one side. Her eyes were heavy-lidded and warm, the pupils large and brilliant.

“Take that thing off,” he said, gesturing.

“You take it off,” she said. “You can figure out the knots, Mr Telephone Man.”

He bent to do it. She always made him feel like a dry-mouth kid stepping up to the plate for the first time, and his hands always trembled when they got near her, as if her very flesh was transmitting a strong current into the air all around her. She never left his mind completely anymore. She was lodged in there like a sore inside the cheek which the tongue keeps poking and testing. She even cavorted through his dreams, golden-skinned, blackly exciting. Her invention knew no bounds.

“No, on your knees,” she said. “Get on your knees for me.”

He dropped clumsily onto his knees and crawled toward her, reaching for the apron ties. She put one high-heeled foot on each shoulder. He bent to kiss the inside of her thigh, the flesh firm and slightly warm under his lips.

“That’s right, Corey, that’s just right, keep going up, keep—”

“Well, this is cute, ain’t it?”

Bonnie Sawyer screamed.

Corey Bryant looked up, blinking and confused.

Reggie Sawyer was leaning in the bedroom doorway. He was holding a shotgun cradled loosely over his forearm, barrels pointed at the floor.

Corey felt a warm gush as his bladder let go.

“So it’s true,” Reggie marveled. He stepped into the room. He was smiling. “How about that? I owe that tosspot Mickey Sylvester a case of Budweiser. Goddamn.”

Bonnie found her voice first.

“Reggie, listen. It isn’t what you think. He broke in, he was like a crazy-man, he, he was—”

“Shut up, cunt.” He was still smiling. It was a gentle smile. He was quite big. He was wearing the same steel-colored suit he had been wearing when she had kissed him good-by two hours before.

“Listen,” Corey said weakly. His mouth felt full of loose spit. “Please. Please don’t kill me. Not even if I deserve it. You don’t want to go to jail. Not over this. Beat me up, I got that coming, but please don’t—”

“Get up off your knees, Perry Mason,” Reggie Sawyer said, still smiling his gentle smile. “Your fly’s unzipped.”

“Listen, Mr Sawyer—”

“Oh, call me Reggie,” Reggie said, smiling gently. “We’re almost best buddies. I’ve even been getting your sloppy seconds, isn’t that right?”

“Reggie, this isn’t what you think, he raped me—”

Reggie looked at her and his smile was gentle and benign. “If you say another word, I’m going to jam this up inside you and let you have some special airmail.”

Bonnie began to moan. Her face had gone the color of unflavored yogurt.

“Mr Sawyer…Reggie…”

“Your name’s Bryant, ain’t it? Your daddy’s Pete Bryant, ain’t he?”

Corey’s head bobbed madly in agreement. “Yeah, that’s right. That’s just right. Listen—”

“I used to sell him number two fuel oil when I was driving for Jim Webber,” Reggie said, smiling with gentle reminiscence. “That was four or five years before I met this high-box bitch here. Your daddy know you’re here?”

“No, sir, it’d break his heart. You can beat me up, I got that coming, but if you kill me my daddy’d find out and I bet it’d kill him dead as shit and then you’d be responsible for two—”

“No, I bet he don’t know. Come on out in the living room a minute. We got to talk this over. Come on.” He smiled gently at Corey to show him that he meant him no harm and then his eyes flicked to Bonnie, who was staring at him with bulging eyes. “You stay right there, puss, or you ain’t never going to know how Secret Storm comes out. Come on, Bryant.” He gestured with the shotgun.

Corey walked out into the living room ahead of Reggie, staggering a little. His legs were rubber. A patch between his shoulder blades began to itch insanely. That’s where he’s going to put it, he thought, right between the shoulder blades. I wonder if I’ll live long enough to see my guts hit the wall—

“Turn around,” Reggie said.

Corey turned around. He was beginning to blubber. He didn’t want to blubber, but he couldn’t seem to help it. He supposed it didn’t matter if he blubbered or not. He had already wet himself.

The shotgun was no longer dangling casually over Reggie’s forearm. The double barrels were pointing directly at Corey’s face. The twin bores seemed to swell and yawn until they were bottomless wells.

“You know what you been doin’?” Reggie asked. The smile was gone. His face was very grave.

Corey didn’t answer. It was a stupid question. He did keep on blubbering, however.

“You slept with another guy’s wife, Corey. That your name?”

Corey nodded, tears streaming down his cheeks.

“You know what happens to guys like that if they get caught?”

Corey nodded.

“Grab the barrel of this shotgun, Corey. Very easy. It’s got a five-pound pull and I got about three on it now. So pretend…oh, pretend you’re grabbing my wife’s tit.”

Corey reached out one shaking hand and placed it on the barrel of the shotgun. The metal was cool against his flushed palm. A long, agonized groan came out of his throat. Nothing else was left. Pleading was done.

“Put it in your mouth, Corey. Both barrels. Yes, that’s right. Easy!…that’s okay. Yes, your mouth’s big enough. Slip it right in there. You know all about slipping it in, don’t you?”

Corey’s jaws were open to their widest accommodation. The barrels of the shotgun were pushed back nearly to his palate, and his terrified stomach was trying to retch. The steel was oily against his teeth.

“Close your eyes, Corey.”

Corey only stared at him, his swimming eyes as big as tea saucers.

Reggie smiled his gentle smile again. “Close those baby blue eyes, Corey.”

Corey closed them.

His sphincter let go. He was only dimly aware of it.

Reggie pulled both triggers. The hammers fell on empty chambers with a double click-click.

Corey fell onto the floor in a dead faint.

Reggie looked down at him for a moment, smiling gently, and then reversed the shotgun so the butt end was up. He turned to the bedroom.

“Here I come, Bonnie. Ready or not.”

Bonnie Sawyer began to scream.


NINE

Corey Bryant was stumbling up the Deep Cut Road toward where he had left his phone truck parked. He stank. His eyes were bloodshot and glassy. There was a large bump on the back of his head where he had struck it on the floor when he fainted. His boots made dragging, scuffing sounds on the soft shoulder. He tried to think about the scuffing sounds and nothing else, most notably about the sudden and utter ruin of his life. It was quarter past eight.

Reggie Sawyer had still been smiling gently when he ushered Corey out the kitchen door. Bonnie’s steady, racking sobs had come from the bedroom, counterpointing his words. “You go on up the road like a good boy, now. Get in your truck and go back to town. There’s a bus that comes in from Lewiston for Boston at quarter to ten. From Boston you can get a bus to anywhere in the country. That bus stops at Spencer’s. You be on it. Because if I ever see you again, I’m going to kill you. She’ll be all right now. She’s broke in now. She’s gonna have to wear pants and long-sleeve blouses for a couple of weeks, but I didn’t mark her face. You just want to get out of ’salem’s Lot before you clean yourself up and start thinking you are a man again.”

And now here he was, walking up this road, about to do just what Reggie Sawyer said. He could go south from Boston…somewhere. He had a little over a thousand dollars saved in the bank. His mother had always said he was a very saving soul. He could wire for the money, live on it until he could get a job and begin the years-long job of forgetting this night—the taste of the gun barrel, the smell of his own shit satcheled in his trousers.

“Hello, Mr Bryant.”

Corey gave a stifled scream and stared wildly into the dark, at first seeing nothing. The wind was moving in the trees, making shadows jump and dance across the road. Suddenly his eyes made out a more solid shadow, standing by the stone wall that ran between the road and Carl Smith’s back pasture. The shadow had a manlike form, but there was something…something…

“Who are you?”

“A friend who sees much, Mr Bryant.”

The form shifted and came from the shadows. In the faint light, Corey saw a middle-aged man with a black mustache and deep, bright eyes.

“You’ve been ill used, Mr Bryant.”

“How do you know my business?”

“I know a great deal. It’s my business to know. Smoke?”

“Thanks.” He took the offered cigarette gratefully. He put it between his lips. The stranger struck a light, and in the glow of the wooden match he saw that the stranger’s cheekbones were high and Slavic, his forehead pale and bony, his dark hair swept straight back. Then the light was gone and Corey was dragging harsh smoke into his lungs. It was a dago cigarette, but any cigarette was better than none. He began to feel a little calmer.

“Who are you?” he asked again.

The stranger laughed, a startlingly rich and full-bodied sound that drifted off on the slight breeze like the smoke of Corey’s cigarette.

“Names!” he said. “Oh, the American insistence on names! Let me sell you an auto because I am Bill Smith! Eat at this one! Watch that one on television! My name is Barlow, if that eases you.” And he burst into laughter again, his eyes twinkling and shining. Corey felt a smile creep onto his own lips and could scarcely believe it. His troubles seemed distant, unimportant, in comparison to the derisive good humor in those dark eyes.

“You’re a foreigner, aren’t you?” Corey asked.

“I am from many lands; but to me this country…this town…seems full of foreigners. You see? Eh? Eh?” He burst into that full-throated crow of laughter again, and this time Corey found himself joining in. The laughter escaped his throat under full pressure, rising a bit with delayed hysteria.

“Foreigners, yes,” he resumed, “but beautiful, enticing foreigners, bursting with vitality, full-blooded and full of life. Do you know how beautiful the people of your country and your town are, Mr Bryant?”

Corey only chuckled, slightly embarrassed. He did not look away from the stranger’s face, however. It held him rapt.

“They have never known hunger or want, the people of this country. It has been two generations since they knew anything close to it, and even then it was like a voice in a distant room. They think they have known sadness, but their sadness is that of a child who has spilled his ice cream on the grass at a birthday party. There is no…how is the English?…attenuation in them. They spill each other’s blood with great vigor. Do you believe it? Do you see?”

“Yes,” Corey said. Looking into the stranger’s eyes, he could see a great many things, all of them wonderful.

“The country is an amazing paradox. In other lands, when a man eats to his fullest day after day, that man becomes fat…sleepy…piggish. But in this land…it seems the more you have the more aggressive you become. You see? Like Mr Sawyer. With so much; yet he begrudges you a few crumbs from his table. Also like a child at a birthday party, who will push away another baby even though he himself can eat no more. Is it not so?”

“Yes,” Corey said. Barlow’s eyes were so large, and so understanding. It was all a matter of—

“It is all a matter of perspective, is it not?”

“Yes!” Corey exclaimed. The man had put his finger on the right, the exact, the perfect, word. The cigarette dropped unnoticed from his fingers and lay smoldering on the road.

“I might have bypassed such a rustic community as this,” the stranger said reflectively. “I might have gone to one of your great and teeming cities. Bah!” He drew himself up suddenly, and his eyes flashed. “What do I know of cities? I should be run over by a hansom crossing the street! I should choke on nasty air! I should come in contact with sleek, stupid dilettantes whose concerns are…what do you say? inimical?…yes, inimical to me. How should a poor rustic like myself deal with the hollow sophistication of a great city…even an American city? No! And no and no! I spit on your cities!”

“Oh yes!” Corey whispered.

“So I have come here, to a town which was first told of to me by a most brilliant man, a former townsman himself, now lamentably deceased. The folk here are still rich and full-blooded, folk who are stuffed with the aggression and darkness so necessary to…there is no English for it. Pokol; vurderlak; eyalik. Do you follow?”

“Yes,” Corey whispered.

“The people have not cut off the vitality which flows from their mother, the earth, with a shell of concrete and cement. Their hands are plunged into the very waters of life. They have ripped the life from the earth, whole and beating! Is it not true?”

“Yes!”

The stranger chuckled kindly and put a hand on Corey’s shoulder. “You are a good boy. A fine, strong boy. I don’t think you want to leave this so-perfect town, do you?”

“No…” Corey whispered, but he was suddenly doubtful. Fear was returning. But surely it was unimportant. This man would allow no harm to come to him.

“And so you shall not. Ever again.”

Corey stood trembling, rooted to the spot, as Barlow’s head inclined toward him.

“And you shall yet have your vengeance on those who would fill themselves while others want.”

Corey Bryant sank into a great forgetful river, and that river was time, and its waters were red.


TEN

It was nine o’clock and the Saturday night movie was coming on the hospital TV bolted to the wall when the phone beside Ben’s bed rang. It was Susan, and her voice was barely under control.

“Ben, Floyd Tibbits is dead. He died in his cell some time last night. Dr Cody says acute anemia—but I went with Floyd! He had high blood pressure. That’s why the Army wouldn’t take him!”

“Slow down,” Ben said, sitting up.

“There’s more. A family named McDougall out in the Bend. A little ten-month-old baby died out there. They took Mrs McDougall away in restraints.”

“Have you heard how the baby died?”

“My mother said Mrs Evans came over when she heard Sandra McDougall screaming, and Mrs Evans called old Dr Plowman. Plowman didn’t say anything, but Mrs Evans told my mother that she couldn’t see a thing wrong with the baby…except it was dead.”

“And both Matt and I, the crackpots, just happen to be out of town and out of action,” Ben said, more to himself than to Susan. “Almost as if it were planned.”

“There’s more.”

“What?”

“Carl Foreman is missing. And so is the body of Mike Ryerson.”

“I think that’s it,” he heard himself saying. “That has to be it. I’m getting out of here tomorrow.”

“Will they let you go so soon?”

“They aren’t going to have anything to say about it.” He spoke the words absently; his mind had already moved on to another subject. “Have you got a crucifix?”

“Me?” She sounded startled and a little amused. “Gosh, no.”

“I’m not joking with you, Susan—I was never more serious. Is there anyplace where you can get one at this hour?”

“Well, there’s Marie Boddin. I could walk—”

“No. Stay off the streets. Stay in the house. Make one yourself, even if it only means gluing two sticks together. Leave it by your bed.”

“Ben, I still don’t believe this. A maniac, maybe, someone who thinks he’s a vampire, but—”

“Believe what you want, but make the cross.”

“But—”

“Will you do it? Even if it only means humoring me?”

Reluctantly: “Yes, Ben.”

“Can you come to the hospital tomorrow around nine?”

“Yes.”

“Okay. We’ll go upstairs and fill in Matt together. Then you and I are going to talk to Dr James Cody.”

She said, “He’s going to think you’re crazy, Ben. Don’t you know that?”

“I suppose I do. But it all seems more real after dark, doesn’t it?”

“Yes,” she said softly. “God, yes.”

For no reason at all he thought of Miranda and Miranda’s dying: the motorcycle hitting the wet patch, going into a skid, the sound of her scream, his own brute panic, and the side of the truck growing and growing as they approached it broadside.

“Susan?”

“Yes.”

“Take good care of yourself. Please.”

After she hung up, he put the phone back in the cradle and stared at the TV, barely seeing the Doris Day-Rock Hudson comedy that had begun to unreel up there. He felt naked, exposed. He had no cross himself. His eyes strayed to the windows, which showed only blackness. The old, childlike terror of the dark began to creep over him and he looked at the television where Doris Day was giving a shaggy dog a bubble bath and was afraid.


ELEVEN

The county morgue in Portland is a cold and antiseptic room done entirely in green tile. The floors and walls are a uniform medium green, and the ceiling is a lighter green. The walls are lined with square doors which look like large bus-terminal coin lockers. Long parallel fluorescent tubes shed a chilly neutral light over all of this. The decor is hardly inspired, but none of the clientele have ever been known to complain.

At quarter to ten on this Saturday night, two attendants were wheeling in the sheet-covered body of a young homosexual who had been shot in a downtown bar. It was the first stiff they had received that night; the highway fatals usually came in between 1:00 and 3:00 am.

Buddy Bascomb was in the middle of a Frenchman joke that had to do with vaginal deodorant spray when he broke off in midsentence and stared down the line of locker doors M-Z. Two of them were standing open.

He and Bob Greenberg left the new arrival and hurried down quickly. Buddy glanced at the tag on the first door he came to while Bob went down to the next.



TIBBITS, FLOYD MARTIN

Sex: M

Admitted: 10/4/75

Autops. sched.: 10/5/75

Signator: J.M. Cody, M.D.



He yanked the handle set inside the door, and the slab rolled out on silent casters.

Empty.

“Hey!” Greenberg yelled up to him. “This fucking thing is empty! Whose idea of a joke—”

“I was on the desk all the time,” Buddy said. “No one went by me. I’d swear to it. It must have happened on Carty’s shift. What’s the name on that one?”

“McDougall, Randall Fratus. What does this abbreviation inf. mean?”

“Infant,” Buddy said dully. “Jesus Christ, I think we’re in trouble.”


TWELVE

Something had awakened him.

He lay still in the ticking dark, looking at the ceiling.

A noise. Some noise. But the house was silent.

There it was again. Scratching.

Mark Petrie turned over in bed and looked through the window and Danny Glick was staring in at him through the glass, his skin grave-pale, his eyes reddish and feral. Some dark substance was smeared about his lips and chin, and when he saw Mark looking at him, he smiled and showed teeth grown hideously long and sharp.

“Let me in,” the voice whispered, and Mark was not sure if the words had crossed dark air or were only in his mind.

He became aware that he was frightened—his body had known before his mind. He had never been so frightened, not even when he got tired swimming back from the float at Popham Beach and thought he was going to drown. His mind, still that of a child in a thousand ways, made an accurate judgment of his position in seconds. He was in peril of more than his life.

“Let me in, Mark. I want to play with you.”

There was nothing for that hideous entity outside the window to hold on to; his room was on the second floor and there was no ledge. Yet somehow it hung suspended in space…or perhaps it was clinging to the outside shingles like some dark insect.

“Mark…I finally came, Mark. Please…”

Of course. You have to invite them inside. He knew that from his monster magazines, the ones his mother was afraid might damage or warp him in some way.

He got out of bed and almost fell down. It was only then that he realized fright was too mild a word for this. Even terror did not express what he felt. The pallid face outside the window tried to smile, but it had lain in darkness too long to remember precisely how. What Mark saw was a twitching grimace—a bloody mask of tragedy.

Yet if you looked in the eyes, it wasn’t so bad. If you looked in the eyes, you weren’t so afraid anymore and you saw that all you had to do was open the window and say, “C’mon in, Danny,” and then you wouldn’t be afraid at all because you’d be at one with Danny and all of them and at one with him. You’d be—

No! That’s how they get you!

He dragged his eyes away, and it took all of his willpower to do it.

“Mark, let me in! I command it! He commands it!”

Mark began to walk toward the window again. There was no help for it. There was no possible way to deny that voice. As he drew closer to the glass, the evil little boy’s face on the other side began to twitch and grimace with eagerness. Fingernails, black with earth, scratched across the windowpane.

Think of something. Quick! Quick!

“The rain,” he whispered hoarsely. “The rain in Spain falls mainly on the plain. In vain he thrusts his fists against the posts and still insists he sees the ghosts.”

Danny Glick hissed at him.

“Mark! Open the window!”

“Betty Bitter bought some butter—”

“The window, Mark, he commands it!”

“—but, says Betty, this butter’s bitter.”

He was weakening. That whispering voice was seeing through his barricade, and the command was imperative. Mark’s eyes fell on his desk, littered with his model monsters, now so bland and foolish—

His eyes fixed abruptly on part of the display, and widened slightly.

The plastic ghoul was walking through a plastic graveyard and one of the monuments was in the shape of a cross.

With no pause for thought or consideration (both would have come to an adult—his father, for instance—and both would have undone him), Mark swept up the cross, curled it into a tight fist, and said loudly: “Come on in, then.”

The face became suffused with an expression of vulpine triumph. The window slid up and Danny stepped in and took two paces forward. The exhalation from that opening mouth was fetid, beyond description: a smell of charnel pits. Cold, fish-white hands descended on Mark’s shoulders. The head cocked, doglike, the upper lip curled away from those shining canines.

Mark brought the plastic cross around in a vicious swipe and laid it against Danny Glick’s cheek.

His scream was horrible, unearthly…and silent. It echoed only in the corridors of his brain and the chambers of his soul. The smile of triumph on the Glick-thing’s mouth became a yawning grimace of agony. Smoke spurted from the pallid flesh, and for just a moment, before the creature twisted away and half dived, half fell out the window, Mark felt the flesh yield like smoke.

And then it was over, as if it had never happened.

But for a moment the cross shone with a fierce light, as if an inner wire had been ignited. Then it dwindled away, leaving only a blue afterimage in front of his eyes.

Through the grating in the floor, he heard the distinctive click of the lamp in his parents’ bedroom and his father’s voice: “What in hell was that?”


THIRTEEN

His bedroom door opened two minutes later, but that was still time enough to set things to rights.

“Son?” Henry Petrie asked softly. “Are you awake?”

“I guess so,” Mark answered sleepily.

“Did you have a bad dream?”

“I…think so. I don’t remember.”

“You called out in your sleep.”

“Sorry.”

“No, don’t be sorry.” He hesitated and then spoke from earlier memories of his son, a small child in a blue blanket-suit that had been much more trouble but infinitely more explicable: “Do you want a drink of water?”

“No thanks, Dad.”

Henry Petrie surveyed the room briefly, unable to understand the trembling feeling of dread he had wakened with, and which lingered still—a feeling of disaster averted by cold inches. Yes, everything seemed all right. The window was shut. Nothing was knocked over.

“Mark, is anything wrong?”

“No, Dad.”

“Well…g’night, then.”

“Night.”

The door shut softly and his father’s slippered feet descended the stairs. Mark let himself go limp with relief and delayed reaction. An adult might have had hysterics at this point, as a slightly younger or older child might also have done. But Mark felt the terror slip from him in almost imperceptible degrees, and the sensation reminded him of letting the wind dry you after you had been swimming on a cool day. And as the terror left, drowsiness began to come in its place.

Before drifting away entirely, he found himself reflecting—not for the first time—on the peculiarity of adults. They took laxatives, liquor, or sleeping pills to drive away their terrors so that sleep would come, and their terrors were so tame and domestic: the job, the money, what the teacher will think if I can’t get Jennie nicer clothes, does my wife still love me, who are my friends. They were pallid compared to the fears every child lies cheek and jowl with in his dark bed, with no one to confess to in hope of perfect understanding but another child. There is no group therapy or psychiatry or community social services for the child who must cope with the thing under the bed or in the cellar every night, the thing which leers and capers and threatens just beyond the point where vision will reach. The same lonely battle must be fought night after night and the only cure is the eventual ossification of the imaginary faculties, and this is called adulthood.

In some shorter, simpler mental shorthand, these thoughts passed through his brain. The night before, Matt Burke had faced such a dark thing and had been stricken by a heart seizure brought on by fright; tonight Mark Petrie had faced one, and ten minutes later lay in the lap of sleep, the plastic cross still grasped loosely in his right hand like a child’s rattle. Such is the difference between men and boys.





Chapter Eleven

Ben (IV)

It was ten past nine on Sunday morning—a bright, sun-washed Sunday morning—and Ben was beginning to get seriously worried about Susan when the phone by his bed rang. He snatched it up.

“Where are you?”

“Relax. I’m upstairs with Matt Burke. Who requests the pleasure of your company as soon as you’re able.”

“Why didn’t you come—”

“I looked in on you earlier. You were sleeping like a lamb.”

“They give you knockout stuff in the night so they can steal different organs for mysterious billionaire patients,” he said. “How’s Matt?”

“Come up and see for yourself,” she said, and before she could do more than hang up, he was getting into his robe.


TWO

Matt looked much better, rejuvenated, almost. Susan was sitting by his bed in a bright blue dress, and Matt raised a hand in salute when Ben walked in. “Drag up a rock.”

Ben pulled over one of the hideously uncomfortable hospital chairs and sat down. “How you feeling?”

“A lot better. Weak, but better. They took the I.V. out of my arm last night and gave me a poached egg for breakfast this morning. Gag. Previews of the old folks home.”

Ben kissed Susan lightly and saw a strained kind of composure on her face, as if everything was being held together by fine wire.

“Is there anything new since you called last night?”

“Nothing I’ve heard. But I left the house around seven and the Lot wakes up a little later on Sunday.”

Ben shifted his gaze to Matt. “Are you up to talking this thing over?”

“Yes, I think so,” he said, and shifted slightly. The gold cross Ben had hung around his neck flashed prominently. “By the way, thank you for this. It’s a great comfort, even though I bought it on the remaindered shelf at Woolworth’s Friday afternoon.”

“What’s your condition?”

“‘Stabilized’ is the fulsome term young Dr Cody used when he examined me late yesterday afternoon. According to the EKG he took, it was strictly a minor-league heart attack…no clot formation.” He harrumphed. “Should hope for his sake it wasn’t. Coming just a week after the checkup he gave me, I’d sue his sheepskin off the wall for breach of promise.” He broke off and looked levelly at Ben. “He said he’d seen such cases brought on by massive shock. I kept my lip zipped. Did I do right?”

“Just right. But things have developed. Susan and I are going to see Cody today and spill everything. If he doesn’t sign the committal papers on me right away, we’ll send him to you.”

“I’ll give him an earful,” Matt said balefully. “Snot-nosed little son of a bitch won’t let me have my pipe.”

“Has Susan told you what’s been happening in Jerusalem’s Lot since Friday night?”

“No. She said she wanted to wait until we were all together.”

“Before she does, will you tell me exactly what happened at your house?”

Matt’s face darkened, and for a moment the mask of convalescence fluttered. Ben glimpsed the old man he had seen sleeping the day before.

“If you’re not up to it—”

“No, of course I am. I must be, if half of what I suspect is true.” He smiled bitterly. “I’ve always considered myself a bit of a free thinker, not easily shocked. But it’s amazing how hard the mind can try to block out something it doesn’t like or finds threatening. Like the magic slates we had as boys. If you didn’t like what you had drawn, you had only to pull the top sheet up and it would disappear.”

“But the line stayed on the black stuff underneath forever,” Susan said.

“Yes.” He smiled at her. “A lovely metaphor for the interaction of the conscious and unconscious mind. A pity Freud was stuck with onions. But we wander.” He looked at Ben. “You’ve heard this once from Susan?”

“Yes, but—”

“Of course. I only wanted to be sure I could dispense with the background.”

He told the story in a nearly flat, inflectionless voice, pausing only when a nurse entered on whisper-soft crepe soles to ask him if he would like a glass of ginger ale. Matt told her it would be wonderful to have a ginger ale, and he sucked on the flexible straw at intervals as he finished. Ben noticed that when he got to the part about Mike going out the window backward, the ice cubes clinked slightly in the glass as he held it. Yet his voice did not waver; it retained the same even, slightly inflected tones that he undoubtedly used in his classes. Ben thought, not for the first time, that he was an admirable man.

There was a brief pause when he had finished, and Matt broke it himself.

“And so,” he said. “You who have seen nothing with your own eyes, what think you of this hearsay?”

“We talked that over for quite a while yesterday,” Susan said. “I’ll let Ben tell you.”

A little shy, Ben advanced each of the reasonable explanations and then knocked it down. When he mentioned the screen that fastened on the outside, the soft ground, the lack of ladder feet impressions, Matt applauded.

“Bravo! A sleuth!”

Matt looked at Susan. “And you, Miss Norton, who used to write such well-organized themes with paragraphs like building blocks and topic sentences for mortar? What do you think?”

She looked down at her hands, which were folding a pleat of her dress, and then back up at him. “Ben lectured me on the linguistic meanings of can’t yesterday, so I won’t use that word. But it’s very difficult for me to believe that vampires are stalking ’salem’s Lot, Mr Burke.”

“If it can be arranged so that secrecy will not be breached, I will take a polygraph test,” he said softly.

She colored a little. “No, no—don’t misunderstand me, please. I’m convinced that something is going on in town. Something…horrible. But…this…”

He put his hand out and covered hers with it. “I understand that, Susan. But will you do something for me?”

“If I can.”

“Let us…the three of us…proceed on the premise that all of this is real. Let us keep that premise before us as fact until—and only until—it can be disproved. The scientific method, you see? Ben and I have already discussed ways and means of putting the premise to the test. And no one hopes more than I that it can be disproved.”

“But you don’t think it will be, do you?”

“No,” he said softly. “After a long conversation with myself, I’ve reached my decision. I believe what I saw.”

“Let’s put questions of belief and unbelief behind us for the minute,” Ben said. “Right now they’re moot.”

“Agreed,” Matt said. “What are your ideas about procedure?”

“Well,” Ben said, “I’d like to appoint you Researcher General. With your background, you’re uniquely well fitted for the job. And you’re off your feet.”

Matt’s eyes gleamed as they had over Cody’s perfidy in declaring his pipe off-limits. “I’ll have Loretta Starcher on the phone when the library opens. She’ll have to bring the books down in a wheelbarrow.”

“It’s Sunday,” Susan reminded. “Library’s closed.”

“She’ll open it for me,” Matt said, “or I’ll know the reason why.”

“Get anything and everything that bears on the subject,” Ben said. “Psychological as well as pathological and mythic. You understand? The whole works.”

“I’ll start a notebook,” Matt rasped. “Before God, I will!” He looked at them both. “This is the first time since I woke up in here that I feel like a man. What will you be doing?”

“First, Dr Cody. He examined both Ryerson and Floyd Tibbits. Perhaps we can persuade him to exhume Danny Glick.”

“Would he do that?” Susan asked Matt.

Matt sucked at his ginger ale before answering. “The Jimmy Cody I had in class would have, in a minute. He was an imaginative, open-minded boy who was remarkably resistant to cant. How much of an empiricist college and med school may have made of him, I don’t know.”

“All of this seems roundabout to me,” Susan said. “Especially going to Dr Cody and risking a complete rebuff. Why don’t Ben and I just go up to the Marsten House and have done with it? That was on the docket just last week.”

“I’ll tell you why,” Ben said. “Because we are proceeding on the premise that all this is real. Are you so anxious to put your head in the lion’s mouth?”

“I thought vampires slept in the daytime.”

“Whatever Straker may be, he’s not a vampire,” Ben said, “unless the old legends are completely wrong. He’s been highly visible in the daytime. At best we’d be turned away as trespassers with nothing learned. At worst, he might overpower us and keep us there until dark. A wakeup snack for Count Comic Book.”

“Barlow?” Susan asked.

Ben shrugged. “Why not? That story about the New York buying expedition is a little too good to be true.”

The expression in her eyes remained stubborn, but she said nothing more.

“What will you do if Cody laughs you off?” Matt asked. “Always assuming he doesn’t call for the restraints immediately.”

“Off to the graveyard at sunset,” Ben said. “To watch Danny Glick’s grave. Call it a test case.”

Matt half rose from his reclining position. “Promise me that you’ll be careful. Ben, promise me!”

“We will,” Susan said soothingly. “We’ll both positively clank with crosses.”

“Don’t joke,” Matt muttered. “If you’d seen what I have—” He turned his head and looked out the window, which showed the sunshanked leaves of an alder and the autumn-bright sky beyond.

“If she’s joking, I’m not,” Ben said. “We’ll take all precautions.”

“See Father Callahan,” Matt said. “Make him give you some holy water…and if possible, some of the wafer.”

“What kind of man is he?” Ben asked.

Matt shrugged. “A little strange. A drunk, maybe. If he is, he’s a literate, polite one. Perhaps chafing a little under the yoke of enlightened Popery.”

“Are you sure that Father Callahan is a…that he drinks?” Susan asked, her eyes a trifle wide.

“Not positive,” Matt said. “But an ex-student of mine, Brad Campion, works in the Yarmouth liquor store and he says Callahan’s a regular customer. A Jim Beam man. Good taste.”

“Could he be talked to?” Ben asked.

“I don’t know. I think you must try.”

“Then you don’t know him at all?”

“No, not really. He’s writing a history of the Catholic Church in New England, and he knows a great deal about the poets of our so-called golden age—Whittier, Longfellow, Russell, Holmes, that lot. I had him in to speak to my American Lit students late last year. He has a quick, acerbic mind—the students enjoyed him.”

“I’ll see him,” Ben said, “and follow my nose.”

A nurse peeked in, nodded, and a moment later Jimmy Cody entered with a stethoscope around his neck.

“Disturbing my patient?” he asked amiably.

“Not half so much as you are,” Matt said. “I want my pipe.”

“You can’t have it,” Cody said absently, reading Matt’s chart.

“Goddamn quack,” Matt muttered.

Cody put the chart back and drew the green curtain that went around the bed on a C-shaped steel runner overhead. “I’m afraid I’ll have to ask you two to step out in a moment. How is your head, Mr Mears?”

“Well, nothing seems to have leaked out.”

“You heard about Floyd Tibbits?”

“Susan told me. I’d like to speak to you, if you have a moment after your rounds.”

“I can make you the last patient on my rounds, if you like. Around eleven.”

“Fine.”

Cody twitched the curtain again. “And now, if you and Susan would excuse us—”

“Here we go, friends, into isolation,” Matt said. “Say the secret word and win a hundred dollars.”

The curtain came between Ben and Susan and the bed. From beyond it they heard Cody say: “The next time I have you under gas I think I’ll take out your tongue and about half of your prefrontal lobe.”

They smiled at each other, the way young couples will when they are in sunshine and there is nothing seriously the matter with their works, and the smiles faded almost simultaneously. For a moment they both wondered if they might not be crazy.


THREE

When Jimmy Cody finally came into Ben’s room, it was twenty after eleven and Ben began, “What I wanted to talk to you about—”

“First the head, then the talk.” He parted Ben’s hair gently, looked at something, and said, “This’ll hurt.” He pulled off the adhesive bandage and Ben jumped. “Hell of a lump,” Cody said conversationally, and then covered the wound with a slightly smaller dressing.

He shone a light into Ben’s eyes, then tapped his left knee with a rubber hammer. With sudden morbidity, Ben wondered if it was the same one he had used on Mike Ryerson.

“All that seems to be satisfactory,” he said, putting his things away. “What’s your mother’s maiden name?”

“Ashford,” Ben said. They had asked him similar questions when he had first recovered consciousness.

“First-grade teacher?”

“Mrs Perkins. She rinsed her hair.”

“Father’s middle name?”

“Merton.”

“Any dizziness or nausea?”

“No.”

“Experience of strange odors, colors, or—”

“No, no, and no. I feel fine.”

“I’ll decide that,” Cody said primly. “Any instance of double vision?”

“Not since the last time I bought a gallon of Thunderbird.”

“All right,” Cody said. “I pronounce you cured through the wonders of modern science and by virtue of a hard head. Now, what was on your mind? Tibbits and the little McDougall boy, I suppose. I can only tell you what I told Parkins Gillespie. Number one, I’m glad they’ve kept it out of the papers; one scandal per century is enough in a small town. Number two, I’m damned if I know who’d want to do such a twisted thing. It can’t have been a local person. We’ve got our share of the weirdies, but—”

He broke off, seeing the puzzled expressions on their faces. “You don’t know? Haven’t heard?”

“Heard what?” Ben demanded.

“It’s rather like something by Boris Karloff out of Mary Shelley. Someone snatched the bodies from the Cumberland County Morgue in Portland last night.”

“Jesus Christ,” Susan said. Her lips made the words stiffly.

“What’s the matter?” Cody asked, suddenly concerned. “Do you know something about this?”

“I’m starting to really think we do,” Ben said.


FOUR

It was ten past noon when they had finished telling everything. The nurse had brought Ben a lunch tray, and it stood untouched by his bed.

The last syllable died away, and the only sound was the rattle of glasses and cutlery coming through the half-open door as hungrier patients on the ward ate.

“Vampires,” Jimmy Cody said. Then: “Matt Burke, of all people. That makes it awfully hard to laugh off.”

Ben and Susan kept silent.

“And you want me to exhume the Glick kid,” he ruminated. “Jesus jumped-up Christ in a sidecar.”

Cody took a bottle out of his bag and tossed it to Ben, who caught it. “Aspirin,” he said. “Ever use it?”

“A lot.”

“My dad used to call it the good doctor’s best nurse. Do you know how it works?”

“No,” Ben said. He turned the bottle of aspirin idly in his hands, looking at it. He did not know Cody well enough to know what he usually showed or kept hidden, but he was sure that few of his patients saw him like this—the boyish, Norman Rockwell face overcast with thought and introspection. He didn’t want to break Cody’s mood.

“Neither do I. Neither does anybody else. But it’s good for headache and arthritis and the rheumatism. We don’t know what any of those are, either. Why should your head ache? There are no nerves in your brain. We know that aspirin is very close in chemical composition to LSD, but why should one cure the ache in the head and the other cause the head to fill up with flowers? Part of the reason we don’t understand is because we don’t really know what the brain is. The best-educated doctor in the world is standing on a low island in the middle of a sea of ignorance. We rattle our medicine sticks and kill our chickens and read messages in blood. All of that works a surprising amount of time. White magic. Bene gris-gris. My med school profs would tear their hair if they could hear me say that. Some of them tore it when I told them I was going into general practice in rural Maine. One of them told me that Marcus Welby always lanced the boils on the patient’s ass during station identification. But I never wanted to be Marcus Welby.” He smiled. “They’d roll on the ground and have fits if they knew I was going to request an exhumation order on the Glick boy.”

“You’ll do it?” Susan said, frankly amazed.

“What can it hurt? If he’s dead, he’s dead. If he’s not, then I’ll have something to stand the AMA convention on its ear next time. I’m going to tell the county M.E. that I want to look for signs of infectious encephalitis. It’s the only sane explanation I can think of.”

“Could that actually be it?” she asked hopefully.

“Damned unlikely.”

“What’s the earliest you could do it?” Ben asked.

“Tomorrow, tops. If I have to hassle around, Tuesday or Wednesday.”

“What should he look like?” Ben asked. “I mean…”

“Yes, I know what you mean. The Glicks wouldn’t have the boy embalmed, would they?”

“No.”

“It’s been a week?”

“Yes.”

“When the coffin is opened, there’s apt to be a rush of gas and a rather offensive smell. The body may be bloated. The hair will have grown down over his collar—it continues to grow for an amazing period of time—and the fingernails will also be quite long. The eyes will almost certainly have fallen in.”

Susan was trying to maintain an expression of scientific impartiality and not succeeding very well. Ben was glad he hadn’t eaten lunch.

“The corpse will not have begun radical mortification,” Cody went on in his best recitation voice, “but enough moisture may be present to encourage growth on the exposed cheeks and hands, possibly a mossy substance called—” He broke off. “I’m sorry. I’m grossing you out.”

“Some things may be worse than decay,” Ben remarked, keeping his voice carefully neutral. “Suppose you find none of those signs? Suppose the body is as natural-looking as the day it was buried? What then? Pound a stake through his heart?”

“Hardly,” Cody said. “In the first place, either the M.E. or his assistant will have to be there. I don’t think even Brent Norbert would regard it professional of me to take a stake out of my bag and hammer it through a child’s corpse.”

“What will you do?” Ben asked curiously.

“Well, begging Matt Burke’s pardon, I don’t think that will come up. If the body was in such a condition, it would undoubtedly be brought to the Maine Medical Center for an extensive post. Once there, I would dally about my examination until dark…and observe any phenomena that might occur.”

“And if he rises?”

“Like you, I can’t conceive of that.”

“I’m finding it more conceivable all the time,” Ben said grimly. “Can I be present when all this happens—if it does?”

“That might be arranged.”

“All right,” Ben said. He got out of bed and walked toward the closet where his clothes were hanging. “I’m going to—”

Susan giggled, and Ben turned around. “What?”

Cody was grinning. “Hospital johnnies have a tendency to flap in the back, Mr Mears.”

“Oh hell,” Ben said, and instinctively reached around to pull the johnny together. “You better call me Ben.”

“And on that note,” Cody said, rising, “Susan and I will exit. Meet us downstairs in the coffee shop when you’re decent. You and I have some business this afternoon.”

“We do?”

“Yes. The Glicks will have to be told the encephalitis story. You can be my colleague if you like. Don’t say anything. Just stroke your chin and look wise.”

“They’re not going to like it, are they?”

“Would you?”

“No,” Ben said. “I wouldn’t.”

“Do you need their permission to get an exhumation order?” Susan asked.

“Technically, no. Realistically, probably. My only experience with the question of exhuming corpses has been in Medical Law II. But I think if the Glicks are set strongly enough against it, they could force us to a hearing. That would lose us two weeks to a month, and once we got there I doubt if my encephalitis theory would hold up.” He paused and looked at them both. “Which leads us to the thing that disturbs me most about this, Mr Burke’s story aside. Danny Glick is the only corpse we have a marker for. All the others have disappeared into thin air.”


FIVE

Ben and Jimmy Cody got to the Glick home around one-thirty. Tony Glick’s car was sitting in the driveway, but the house was silent. When no one answered the third knock, they crossed the road to the small ranch-style house that sat there—a sad, prefab refugee of the 1950s held up on one end by a rusty pair of house jacks. The name on the mailbox was Dickens. A pink lawn flamingo stood by the walk, and a small cocker spaniel thumped his tail at their approach.

Pauline Dickens, waitress and part owner of the Excellent Café, opened the door a moment or two after Cody rang the bell. She was wearing her uniform.

“Hi, Pauline,” Jimmy said. “Do you know where the Glicks are?”

“You mean you don’t know?”

“Know what?”

“Mrs Glick died early this morning. They took Tony Glick to Central Maine General. He’s in shock.”

Ben looked at Cody. Jimmy looked like a man who had been kicked in the stomach.

Ben took up the slack quickly. “Where did they take her body?”

Pauline ran her hands across her hips to make sure her uniform was right. “Well, I spoke to Mabel Werts on the phone an hour ago, and she said Parkins Gillespie was going to take the body right up to that Jewish fellow’s funeral home in Cumberland. On account of no one knows where Carl Foreman is.”

“Thank you,” Cody said slowly.

“Awful thing,” she said, her eyes straying to the empty house across the road. Tony Glick’s car sat in the driveway like a large and dusty dog that had been chained and then abandoned. “If I was a superstitious person, I’d be afraid.”

“Afraid of what, Pauline?” Cody asked.

“Oh…things.” She smiled vaguely. Her fingers touched a small chain hung around her neck.

A St Christopher’s medal.


SIX

They were sitting in the car again. They had watched Pauline drive off to work without speaking.

“Now what?” Ben asked finally.

“It’s a balls-up,” Jimmy said. “The Jewish fellow is Maury Green. I think maybe we ought to drive over to Cumberland. Nine years ago Maury’s boy almost drowned at Sebago Lake. I happened to be there with a girlfriend, and I gave the kid artificial respiration. Got his motor going again. Maybe this is one time I ought to trade on somebody’s goodwill.”

“What good will it do? The M.E. will have taken her body for autopsy or postmortem or whatever they call it.”

“I doubt it. It’s Sunday, remember? The M.E. will be out in the woods someplace with a rock hammer—he’s an amateur geologist. Norbert—do you remember Norbert?”

Ben nodded.

“Norbert is supposed to be on call, but he’s erratic. He’s probably got the phone off the hook so he can watch the Packers and the Patriots. If we go up to Maury Green’s funeral parlor now, there’s a pretty fair chance the body will be there unclaimed until after dark.”

“All right,” Ben said. “Let’s go.”

He remembered the call he was to have made on Father Callahan, but it would have to wait. Things were going very fast now. Too fast to suit him. Fantasy and reality had merged.


SEVEN

They drove in silence until they were on the turnpike, each lost in his own thoughts. Ben was thinking about what Cody had said at the hospital. Carl Foreman gone. The bodies of Floyd Tibbits and the McDougall baby gone—disappeared from under the noses of two morgue attendants. Mike Ryerson was also gone, and God knew who else. How many people in ’salem’s Lot could drop out of sight and not be missed for a week…two weeks…a month? Two hundred? Three? It made the palms of his hands sweaty.

“This is beginning to seem like a paranoid’s dream,” Jimmy said, “or a Gahan Wilson cartoon. The scariest part of this whole thing, from an academic point of view, is the relative ease with which a vampire colony could be founded—always if you grant the first one. It’s a bedroom town for Portland and Lewiston and Gates Falls, mostly. There’s no in-town industry where a rise in absenteeism would be noticed. The schools are three-town consolidated, and if the absence list starts getting a little longer, who notices? A lot of people go to church over in Cumberland, a lot more don’t go at all. And TV has pretty well put the kibosh on the old neighborhood get-togethers, except for the duffers who hang around Milt’s store. All this could be going on with great effectiveness behind the scenes.”

“Yeah,” Ben said. “Danny Glick infects Mike. Mike infects…oh, I don’t know. Floyd, maybe. The McDougall baby infects…his father? Mother? How are they? Has anyone checked?”

“Not my patients. I assume Dr Plowman would have been the one to call them this morning and tell them about their son’s disappearance. But I have no real way of knowing if he actually called or actually got in contact with them if he did.”

“They should be checked on,” Ben said. He began to feel harried. “You see how easily we could end up chasing our tails? A person from out of town could drive through the Lot and not know a thing was wrong. Just another one-horse town where they roll up the sidewalks at nine. But who knows what’s going on in the houses, behind drawn shades? People could be lying in their beds…or propped in closets like brooms…down in cellars…waiting for the sun to go down. And each sunrise, less people out on the streets. Less every day.” He swallowed and heard a dry click in his throat.

“Take it easy,” Jimmy said. “None of this is proven.”

“The proof is piling up in drifts,” Ben retorted. “If we were dealing in an accepted frame of reference—with a possible outbreak of typhoid or A2 flu, say—the whole town would be in quarantine by now.”

“I doubt that. You don’t want to forget that only one person has actually seen anything.”

“Hardly the town drunk.”

“He’d be crucified if a story like this got out,” Jimmy said.

“By whom? Not by Pauline Dickens, that’s for sure. She’s ready to start nailing hex signs on her door.”

“In an era of Watergate and oil depletion, she’s an exception,” Jimmy said.

They drove the rest of the way without conversation. Green’s Mortuary was at the north end of Cumberland, and two hearses were parked around back, between the rear door of the nondenominational chapel and a high board fence. Jimmy turned off the ignition and looked at Ben. “Ready?”

“I guess.”

They got out.


EIGHT

The rebellion had been growing in her all afternoon, and around two o’clock it burst its bonds. They were going at it stupidly, taking the long way around the barn to prove something that was (sorry, Mr Burke) probably a lot of horseshit anyway. Susan decided to go up to the Marsten House now, this afternoon.

She went downstairs and picked up her pocketbook. Ann Norton was baking cookies and her father was in the living room, watching the Packers-Patriots game.

“Where are you going?” Mrs Norton asked.

“For a drive.”

“Supper’s at six. See if you can be back on time.”

“Five at the latest.”

She went out and got into her car, which was her proudest possession—not because it was the first one she’d ever owned outright (although it was), but because she had paid for it (almost, she amended; there were six payments left) from her own work, her own talent. It was a Vega hatchback, now almost two years old. She backed it carefully out of the garage and lifted a hand briefly to her mother, who was looking out the kitchen window at her. The break was still between them, not spoken of, not healed. The other quarrels, no matter how bitter, had always knit up in time; life simply went on, burying the hurts under a bandage of days, not ripped off again until the next quarrel, when all the old grudges and grievances would be brought out and counted up like high-scoring cribbage hands. But this one seemed complete, it had been a total war. The wounds were beyond bandaging. Only amputation remained. She had already packed most of her things, and it felt right. This had been long overdue.

She drove out along Brock Street, feeling a growing sense of pleasure and purpose (and a not unpleasant underlayer of absurdity) as the house dropped behind her. She was going to take positive action, and the thought was a tonic to her. She was a forthright girl, and the events of the weekend had bewildered her, left her drifting at sea. Now she would row!

She pulled over onto the soft shoulder outside the village limits, and walked out into Carl Smith’s west pasture to where a roll of red-painted snow fence was curled up, waiting for winter. The sense of absurdity was magnified now, and she couldn’t help grinning as she bent one of the pickets back and forth until the flexible wire holding it to the others snapped. The picket formed a natural stake, about three feet long, tapering to a point. She carried it back to the car and put it in the backseat, knowing intellectually what it was for (she had seen enough Hammer films at the drive-in on double dates to know you had to pound a stake into a vampire’s heart), but never pausing to wonder if she would be able to hammer it through a man’s chest if the situation called for it.

She drove on, past the town limits and into Cumberland. On the left was a small country store that stayed open on Sundays, where her father got the Sunday Times. Susan remembered a small display case of junk jewelry beside the counter.

She bought the Times, and then picked out a small gold crucifix. Her purchases came to four-fifty, and were rung up by a fat counterman who hardly turned from the TV, where Jim Plunkett was being thrown for a loss.

She turned north on the County Road, a newly surfaced stretch of two-lane blacktop. Everything seemed fresh and crisp and alive in the sunny afternoon, and life seemed very dear. Her thoughts jumped from that to Ben. It was a short jump.

The sun came out from behind a slowly moving cumulus cloud, flooding the road with brilliant patches of dark and light as it streamed through the overhanging trees. On a day like this, she thought, it was possible to believe there would be happy endings all around.

About five miles up County, she turned off onto the Brooks Road, which was unpaved once she recrossed the town line into ’salem’s Lot. The road rose and fell and wound through the heavily wooded area northwest of the village, and much of the bright afternoon sunlight was cut off. There were no houses or trailers out here. Most of the land was owned by a paper company most renowned for asking patrons not to squeeze their toilet paper. The verge of the road was marked every one hundred feet with no-hunting and no-trespassing signs. As she passed the turnoff which led to the dump, a ripple of unease went through her. On this gloomy stretch of road, nebulous possibilities seemed more real. She found herself wondering—not for the first time—why any normal man would buy the wreck of a suicide’s house and then keep the windows shuttered against the sunlight.

The road dipped sharply and then rose steeply up the western flank of Marsten’s Hill. She could make out the peak of the Marsten House roof through the trees.

She parked at the head of a disused wood-road at the bottom of the dip and got out of the car. After a moment’s hesitation, she took the stake and hung the crucifix around her neck. She still felt absurd, but not half so absurd as she was going to feel if someone she knew happened to drive by and see her marching up the road with a snow-fence picket in her hand.

Hi, Suze, where you headed?

Oh, just up to the old Marsten place to kill a vampire. But I have to hurry because supper’s at six.

She decided to cut through the woods.

She stepped carefully over a ruinous rock wall at the foot of the road’s ditch, and was glad she had worn slacks. Very much haute couture for fearless vampire killers. There were nasty brambles and deadfalls before the woods actually started.

In the pines it was at least ten degrees cooler, and gloomier still. The ground was carpeted with old needles, and the wind hissed through the trees. Somewhere, some small animal crashed off through the underbrush. She suddenly realized that if she turned to her left, a walk of no more than half a mile would bring her into the Harmony Hill Cemetery, if she were agile enough to scale the back wall.

She toiled steadily upward, going as quietly as possible. As she neared the brow of the hill, she began to catch glimpses of the house through the steadily thinning screen of branches—the blind side of the house in relation to the village below. And she began to be afraid. She could not put her finger on any precise reason, and in that way it was like the fear she had felt (but had already largely forgotten) at Matt Burke’s house. She was fairly sure that no one could hear her, and it was broad daylight—but the fear was there, a steadily oppressive weight. It seemed to be welling into her consciousness from a part of her brain that was usually silent and probably as obsolete as her appendix. Her pleasure in the day was gone. The sense that she was playing was gone. The feeling of decisiveness was gone. She found herself thinking of those same drive-in horror movie epics where the heroine goes venturing up the narrow attic stairs to see what’s frightened poor old Mrs Cobham so, or down into some dark, cobwebby cellar where the walls are rough, sweating stone—symbolic womb—and she, with her date’s arm comfortably around her, thinking: What a silly bitch…I’d never do that! And here she was, doing it, and she began to grasp how deep the division between the human cerebrum and the human midbrain had become; how the cerebrum can force one on and on in spite of the warnings given by that instinctive part, which is so similar in physical construction to the brain of the alligator. The cerebrum could force one on and on, until the attic door was flung open in the face of some grinning horror or one looked into a half-bricked alcove in the cellar and saw—

STOP!

She threw the thoughts off and found that she was sweating. All at the sight of an ordinary house with its shutters closed. You’ve got to stop being stupid, she told herself. You’re going to go up there and spy the place out, that’s all. From the front yard you can see your own house. Now, what in God’s name could happen to you in sight of your own house?

Nonetheless, she bent over slightly and took a tighter grip on the stake, and when the screening trees became too thin to offer much protection, she dropped to her hands and knees and crawled. Three or four minutes later, she had come as far as it was possible without breaking cover. From her spot behind a final stand of pines and a spray of junipers, she could see the west side of the house and the creepered tangle of honeysuckle, now autumn-barren. The grass of summer was yellow but still knee-high. No effort had been made to cut it.

A motor roared suddenly in the stillness, making her heart rise into her throat. She controlled herself by hooking her fingers into the ground and biting hard on her lower lip. A moment later an old black car backed into sight, paused at the head of the driveway, and then turned out onto the road and started away toward town. Before it drew out of sight, she saw the man quite clearly: large bald head, eyes sunken so deeply you could really see nothing of them but the sockets, and the lapels and collar of a dark suit. Straker. On his way in to Crossen’s store, perhaps.

She could see that most of the shutters had broken slats. All right, then. She would creep up and peek through and see what there was to see. Probably nothing but a house in the first stages of a long renovation process, new plastering under way, new papering perhaps, tools and ladders and buckets. All about as romantic and supernatural as a TV football game.

But still: the fear.

It rose suddenly, emotion overspilling logic and the bright Formica reason of the cerebrum, filling her mouth with a taste like black copper.

And she knew someone was behind her even before the hand fell on her shoulder.


NINE

It was almost dark.

Ben got up from the wooden folding chair, walked over to the window that looked out on the funeral parlor’s back lawn, and saw nothing in particular. It was quarter to seven, and evening’s shadows were very long. The grass was still green despite the lateness of the year, and he supposed that the thoughtful mortician would endeavor to keep it so until snow covered it. A symbol of continuing life in the midst of the death of the year. He found the thought inordinately depressing and turned from the view.

“I wish I had a cigarette,” he said.

“They’re killers,” Jimmy told him without turning around. He was watching a Sunday night wildlife program on Maury Green’s small Sony. “Actually, so do I. I quit when the surgeon general did his number on cigarettes ten years ago. Bad P.R. not to. But I always wake up grabbing for the pack on the nightstand.”

“I thought you quit.”

“I keep it there for the same reason some alcoholics keep a bottle of scotch on the kitchen shelf. Willpower, son.”

Ben looked at the clock: 6:47. Maury Green’s Sunday paper said sundown would officially arrive at 7:02 EST.

Jimmy had handled everything quite neatly. Maury Green was a small man who had answered the door in an unbuttoned black vest and an open-collar white shirt. His sober, inquiring expression had changed to a broad smile of welcome.

“Shalom, Jimmy!” he cried. “It’s good to see you! Where you been keeping yourself?”

“Saving the world from the common cold,” Jimmy said, smiling, as Green wrung his hand. “I want you to meet a very good friend of mine. Maury Green, Ben Mears.”

Ben’s hand was enveloped in both of Maury’s. His eyes glistened behind the black-rimmed glasses he wore. “Shalom, also. Any friend of Jimmy’s, and so on. Come on in, both of you. I could call Rachel—”

“Please don’t,” Jimmy said. “We’ve come to ask a favor. A rather large one.”

Green glanced more closely at Jimmy’s face. “‘A rather large one,’” he jeered softly. “And why? What have you ever done for me, that my son should graduate third in his class from Northwestern? Anything, Jimmy.”

Jimmy blushed. “I did what anyone would have done, Maury.”

“I’m not going to argue with you,” Green said. “Ask. What is it that has you and Mr Mears so worried? Have you been in an accident?”

“No. Nothing like that.”

He had taken them into a small kitchenette behind the chapel, and as they talked, he brewed coffee in a battered old pot that sat on a hot plate.

“Has Norbert come after Mrs Glick yet?” Jimmy asked.

“No, and not a sign of him,” Maury said, putting sugar and cream on the table. “That one will come by at eleven tonight and wonder why I’m not here to let him in.” He sighed. “Poor lady. Such tragedy in one family. And she looks so sweet, Jimmy. That old poop Reardon brought her in. She was your patient?”

“No,” Jimmy said. “But Ben and I…we’d like to sit up with her this evening, Maury. Right downstairs.”

Green paused in the act of reaching for the coffeepot. “Sit up with her? Examine her, you mean?”

“No,” Jimmy said steadily. “Just sit up with her.”

“You’re joking?” He looked at them closely. “No, I see you’re not. Why would you want to do that?”

“I can’t tell you that, Maury.”

“Oh.” He poured the coffee, sat down with them, and sipped. “Not too strong. Very nice. Has she got something? Something infectious?”

Jimmy and Ben exchanged a glance.

“Not in the accepted sense of the word,” Jimmy said finally.

“You’d like me to keep my mouth shut about this, eh?”

“Yes.”

“And if Norbert comes?”

“I can handle Norbert,” Jimmy said. “I’ll tell him Reardon asked me to check her for infectious encephalitis. He’ll never check.”

Green nodded. “Norbert doesn’t know enough to check his watch, unless someone asks him.”

“Is it okay, Maury?”

“Sure, sure. I thought you said a big favor.”

“It’s bigger than you think, maybe.”

“When I finish my coffee, I’ll go home and see what horror Rachel has produced for my Sunday dinner. Here is the key. Lock up when you go, Jimmy.”

Jimmy tucked it away in his pocket. “I will. Thanks again, Maury.”

“Anything. Just do me one favor in return.”

“Sure. What?”

“If she says anything, write it down for posterity.” He began to chuckle, saw the identical look on their faces, and stopped.