
FIVE

Ben thought how apt his phrase had been: Let the machinery take over. It was very much like a machine—one of those elaborate German contraptions constructed of clockwork and cogs; figures moving in an elaborate dance.

Parkins Gillespie arrived first, wearing a green tie set off by a VFW tie tack. There were still sleepy seeds in his eyes. He told them he had notified the county M.E.

“He won’t be out himself, the son of a bitch,” Parkins said, tucking a Pall Mall into the corner of his seamed mouth, “but he’ll send out a deputy and a fella to take pitchers. You touch the cawpse?”

“His arm fell out of bed,” Ben said. “I tried to put it back, but it wouldn’t stay.”

Parkins looked him up and down and said nothing. Ben thought of the grisly sound the knuckles had made on the hardwood floor of Matt’s guest room and felt a queasy laughter in his belly. He swallowed to keep it there.

Matt led the way upstairs, and Parkins walked around the body several times. “Say, you sure he’s dead?” he asked finally. “You tried to wake him up?”

James Cody, M.D., arrived next, fresh from a delivery in Cumberland. After the amenities had passed among them (“Good t’seeya,” Parkins Gillespie said, and lit a fresh cigarette), Matt led them all upstairs again. Now, if we all only played instruments, Ben thought, we could give the guy a real send-off. He felt the laughter trying to come up his throat again.

Cody turned back the sheet and frowned down at the body for a moment. With a calmness that astounded Ben, Matt Burke said, “It reminded me of what you said about the Glick boy, Jimmy.”

“That was a privileged communication, Mr Burke,” Jimmy Cody said mildly. “If Danny Glick’s folks found out you’d said that, they could sue me.”

“Would they win?”

“No, probably not,” Jimmy said, and sighed.

“What’s this about the Glick boy?” Parkins asked, frowning.

“Nothing,” Jimmy said. “No connection.” He used his stethoscope, muttered, rolled back an eyelid, and shone a light into the glassy orb beneath.

Ben saw the pupil contract and said quite audibly, “Christ!”

“Interesting reflex, isn’t it?” Jimmy said. He let the eyelid go and it rolled shut with grotesque slowness, as if the corpse had winked at them. “David Prine at Johns Hopkins reports pupillary contraction in some cadavers up to nine hours.”

“Now he’s a scholar,” Matt said gruffly. “Used to pull C’s in Expository Writing.”

“You just didn’t like to read about dissections, you old grump,” Jimmy said absently, and produced a small hammer. Nice, Ben thought. He retains his bedside manner even when the patient is, as Parkins would say, a cawpse. The dark laughter welled inside him again.

“He dead?” Parkins asked, and tapped the ash of his cigarette into an empty flower vase. Matt winced.

“Oh, he’s dead,” Jimmy told him. He got up, turned the sheet back to Ryerson’s feet, and tapped the right knee. The toes were moveless. Ben noticed that Mike Ryerson had yellow rings of callus on the bottoms of his feet, at the ball of the heel and at the instep. It made him think of that Wallace Stevens poem about the dead woman. “Let it be the finale of seem,” he misquoted. “The only emperor is the emperor of ice cream.”

Matt looked at him sharply, and for a moment his control seemed to waver.

“What’s that?” Parkins asked.

“A poem,” Matt said. “It’s from a poem about death.”

“Sounds more like the Good Humor man to me,” Parkins said, and tapped his ash into the vase again.


SIX

“Have we been introduced?” Jimmy asked, looking up at Ben.

“You were, but only in passing,” Matt said. “Jimmy Cody, local quack, meet Ben Mears, local hack. And vice versa.”

“He’s always been clever that way,” Jimmy said. “That’s how he made all his money.”

They shook hands over the body.

“Help me turn him over, Mr Mears.”

A little squeamishly, Ben helped him turn the body on its belly. The flesh was cool, not yet cold, still pliant. Jimmy stared closely at the back, then pulled the jockey shorts down from the buttocks.

“What’s that for?” Parkins asked.

“I’m trying to place the time of death by skin lividity,” Jimmy said. “Blood tends to seek its lowest level when pumping action ceases, like any other fluid.”

“Yeah, sort of like that Drāno commercial. That’s the examiner’s job, ain’t it?”

“He’ll send out Norbert, you know that,” Jimmy said. “And Brent Norbert was never averse to a little help from his friends.”

“Norbert couldn’t find his own ass with both hands and a flashlight,” Parkins said, and flipped his cigarette butt out the open window. “You lost your screen offa this window, Matt. I seen it down on the lawn when I drove in.”

“That so?” Matt asked, his voice carefully controlled.

“Yeah.”

Cody had taken a thermometer from his bag and now he slid it into Ryerson’s anus and laid his watch on the crisp sheet, where it glittered in the strong sunlight. It was quarter of seven.

“I’m going downstairs,” Matt said in a slightly strangled voice.

“You might as well all go,” Jimmy said. “I’ll be a little while longer. Would you put on coffee, Mr Burke?”

“Sure.”

They all went out and Ben closed the door on the scene. His last glance back would remain with him: the bright, sun-washed room, the clean sheet turned back, the gold wristwatch heliographing bright arrows of light onto the wallpaper, and Cody himself, with his swatch of flaming red hair, sitting beside the body like a steel engraving.

Matt was making coffee when Brenton Norbert, the assistant medical examiner, arrived in an elderly gray Dodge. He came in with another man who was carrying a large camera.

“Where is it?” Norbert asked.

Gillespie gestured with his thumb toward the stairs. “Jim Cody’s up there.”

“Good deal,” Norbert said. “The guy’s probably jitterbugging by now.” He and the photographer went upstairs.

Parkins Gillespie poured cream into his coffee until it slopped into his saucer, tested it with his thumb, wiped his thumb on his pants, lit another Pall Mall, and said, “How did you get into this, Mr Mears?”

And so Ben and Matt started their little song and dance and none of what they said was precisely a lie, but enough was left unsaid to link them together in a tenuous bond of conspiracy, and enough to make Ben wonder uneasily if he wasn’t in the process of abetting either a harmless bit of kookery or something more serious, something dark. He thought of Matt saying that he had called Ben because he was the only person in ’salem’s Lot who might listen to such a story. Whatever Matt Burke’s mental failings might be, Ben thought, inability to read character was not one of them. And that also made him nervous.


SEVEN

By nine-thirty it was over.

Carl Foreman’s funeral wagon had come and taken Mike Ryerson’s body away, and the fact of his passing left the house with him and belonged to the town. Jimmy Cody had gone back to his office; Norbert and the photographer had gone to Portland to talk with the county M.E.

Parkins Gillespie stood on the stoop for a moment and watched the hearse trundle slowly up the road, a cigarette dangling between his lips. “All the times Mike drove that, I bet he never guessed how soon he’d be ridin’ in the back.” He turned to Ben. “You ain’t leavin’ the Lot just yet, are you? Like you to testify for the coroner’s jury, if that’s okay by you.”

“No, I’m not leaving.”

The constable’s faded blue eyes measured him. “I checked you through with the feds and the Maine State Police R&I in Augusta,” he said. “You’ve got a clean rep.”

“That’s good to know,” Ben said evenly.

“I hear it around that you’re sparkin’ Bill Norton’s girl.”

“Guilty,” Ben said.

“She’s a fine lass,” Parkins said without smiling. The hearse was out of sight now; even the hum of its engine had dwindled to a drone that faded altogether. “Guess she don’t see much of Floyd Tibbits these days.”

“Haven’t you some paperwork to do, Park?” Matt prodded gently.

He sighed and cast the butt of his cigarette away. “Sure do. Duplicate, triplicate, don’t-punch-spindle-or-mutilate. This job’s been more trouble than a she-bitch with crabs the last couple of weeks. Maybe that old Marsten House has got a curse on it.”

Ben and Matt kept poker faces.

“Well, s’long.” He hitched his pants and walked down to his car. He opened the driver’s side door and then turned back to them. “You two ain’t holdin’ nothin’ back on me, are you?”

“Parkins,” Matt said, “there’s nothing to hold back. He’s dead.”

He looked at them a moment longer, the faded eyes sharp and glittering under his hooked brows, and then he sighed. “I suppose,” he said. “But it’s awful goddamn funny. The dog, the Glick boy, then t’other Glick boy, now Mike. That’s a year’s run for a pissant little burg like this one. My old grammy used to say things ran in threes, not fours.”

He got in, started the engine, and backed out of the driveway. A moment later he was gone over the hill, trailing one farewell honk.

Matt let out a gusty sigh. “That’s over.”

“Yes,” Ben said. “I’m beat. Are you?”

“I am, but I feel…weird. You know that word, the way the kids use it?”

“Yes.”

“They’ve got another one: spaced out. Like coming down from an acid trip or speed, when even being normal is crazy.” He scrubbed a hand across his face. “God, you must think I’m a lunatic. It all sounds like a madman’s raving in the daylight, doesn’t it?”

“Yes and no,” Ben said. He put a diffident hand on Matt’s shoulder. “Gillespie is right, you know. There is something going on. And I’m thinking more and more that it has to do with the Marsten House. Other than myself, the people up there are the only new people in town. And I know I haven’t done anything. Is our trip up there tonight still on? The rustic welcome wagon?”

“If you like.”

“I do. You go in and get some sleep. I’ll get in touch with Susan and we’ll drop by this evening.”

“All right.” He paused. “There’s one other thing. It’s been bothering me ever since you mentioned autopsies.”

“What?”

“The laugh I heard—or thought I heard—was a child’s laugh. Horrible and soulless, but still a child’s laugh. Connected to Mike’s story, does that make you think of Danny Glick?”

“Yes, of course it does.”

“Do you know what the embalming procedure is?”

“Not specifically. The blood is drained from the cadaver and replaced with some fluid. They used to use formaldehyde, but I’m sure they’ve got more sophisticated methods now. And the corpse is eviscerated.”

“I wonder if all that was done to Danny?” Matt said, looking at him.

“Do you know Carl Foreman well enough to ask him in confidence?”

“Yes, I think I could find a way to do that.”

“Do it, by all means.”

“I will.”

They looked at each other a moment longer, and the glance that passed between them was friendly but indefinable; on Matt’s part the uneasy defiance of the rational man who has been forced to speak irrationalities, on Ben’s a kind of ill-defined fright of forces he could not understand enough to define.


EIGHT

Eva was ironing and watching Dialing for Dollars when he came in. The jackpot was currently up to forty-five dollars, and the emcee was picking telephone numbers out of a large glass drum.

“I heard,” she said as he opened the refrigerator and got a Coke. “Awful. Poor Mike.”

“It’s too bad.” He reached into his breast pocket and fished out the crucifix on its fine-link chain.

“Do they know what—”

“Not yet,” Ben said. “I’m very tired, Mrs Miller. I think I’ll sleep for a while.”

“Of course you should. That upstairs room is hot at midday, even this late in the year. Take the one in the downstairs hall if you like. The sheets are fresh.”

“No, that’s all right. I know all the squeaks in the one upstairs.”

“Yes, a person does get used to their own,” she said matter-of-factly. “Why in the world did Mr Burke want Ralph’s crucifix?”

Ben paused on his way to the stairs, momentarily at a loss. “I think he must have thought Mike Ryerson was a Catholic.”

Eva slipped a new shirt on the end of her ironing board. “He should have known better than that. After all, he had Mike in school. All his people were Lutherans.”

Ben had no answer for that. He went upstairs, pulled his clothes off, and got into bed. Sleep came rapidly and heavily. He did not dream.


NINE

When he woke up, it was quarter past four. His body was beaded with sweat, and he had kicked the upper sheet away. Still, he felt clearheaded again. The events of that early morning seemed to be far away and dim, and Matt Burke’s fancies had lost their urgency. His job for tonight was only to humor him out of them if he could.


TEN

He decided that he would call Susan from Spencer’s and have her meet him there. They could go to the park and he would tell her the whole thing from beginning to end. He could get her opinion on their way out to see Matt, and at Matt’s house she could listen to his version and complete her judgment. Then, on to the Marsten House. The thought caused a ripple of fear in his midsection.

He was so involved in his own thoughts that he never noticed that someone was sitting in his car until the door opened and the tall form accordioned out. For a moment his mind was too stunned to command his body; it was busy boggling at what it first took to be an animated scarecrow. The slanting sun picked the figure out in detail that was sharp and cruel: the old fedora hat pulled low around the ears; the wraparound sunglasses; the ragged overcoat with the collar turned up; the heavy industrial green rubber gloves on the hands.

“Who—” was all Ben had time to get out.

The figure moved closer. The fists bunched. There was an old yellow smell that Ben recognized as that of mothballs. He could hear breath slobbering in and out.

“You’re the son of a bitch that stole my girl,” Floyd Tibbits said in a grating, toneless voice. “I’m going to kill you.”

And while Ben was still trying to clear all this through his central switchboard, Floyd Tibbits waded in.





Chapter Nine

Susan (II)

Susan arrived home from Portland a little after three in the afternoon, and came into the house carrying three crackling brown department-store bags—she had sold two paintings for a sum totaling just over eighty dollars and had gone on a small spree. Two new skirts and a cardigan top.

“Suze?” Her mother called. “Is that you?”

“I’m home. I got—”

“Come in here, Susan. I want to talk to you.”

She recognized the tone instantly, although she had not heard it to that precise degree since her high school days, when the arguments over hem lines and boyfriends had gone on day after bitter day.

She put down her bags and went into the living room. Her mother had grown colder and colder on the subject of Ben Mears, and Susan supposed this was to be her Final Word.

Her mother was sitting in the rocker by the bay window, knitting. The TV was off. The two in conjunction were an ominous sign.

“I suppose you haven’t heard the latest,” Mrs Norton said. Her needles clicked rapidly, meshing the dark green yarn she was working with into neat rows. Someone’s winter scarf. “You left too early this morning.”

“Latest?”

“Mike Ryerson died at Matthew Burke’s house last night, and who should be in attendance at the deathbed but your writer friend, Mr Ben Mears!”

“Mike…Ben…what?”

Mrs Norton smiled grimly. “Mabel called around ten this morning and told me. Mr Burke says he met Mike down at Delbert Markey’s tavern last night—although what a teacher is doing barhopping I don’t know—and brought him home with him because Mike didn’t look well. He died in the night. And no one seems to know just what Mr Mears was doing there!”

“They know each other,” Susan said absently. “In fact, Ben says they hit it off really well…what happened to Mike, Mom?”

But Mrs Norton was not to be sidetracked so quickly. “Nonetheless, there’s some that think we’ve had a little too much excitement in ’salem’s Lot since Mr Ben Mears showed his face. A little too much altogether.”

“That’s foolishness!” Susan said, exasperated. “Now, what did Mike—”

“They haven’t decided that yet,” Mrs Norton said. She twirled her ball of yarn and let out slack. “There’s some that think he may have caught a disease from the little Glick boy.”

“If so, why hasn’t anyone else caught it? Like his folks?”

“Some young people think they know everything,” Mrs Norton remarked to the air. Her needles flashed up and down.

Susan got up. “I think I’ll go downstreet and see if—”

“Sit back down a minute,” Mrs Norton said. “I have a few more things to say to you.”

Susan sat down again, her face neutral.

“Sometimes young people don’t know all there is to know,” Ann Norton said. A spurious tone of comfort had come into her voice that Susan distrusted immediately.

“Like what, Mom?”

“Well, it seems that Mr Ben Mears had an accident a few years ago. Just after his second book was published. A motorcycle accident. He was drunk. His wife was killed.”

Susan stood up. “I don’t want to hear any more.”

“I’m telling you for your own good,” Mrs Norton said calmly.

“Who told you?” Susan asked. She felt none of the old hot and impotent anger, or the urge to run upstairs away from that calm, knowing voice and weep. She only felt cold and distant, as if drifting in space. “It was Mabel Werts, wasn’t it?”

“That doesn’t matter. It’s true.”

“Sure it is. And we won in Vietnam and Jesus Christ drives through the center of town in a go-cart every day at high noon.”

“Mabel thought he looked familiar,” Ann Norton said, “and so she went through the back issues of her newspapers box by box—”

“You mean the scandal sheets? The ones that specialize in astrology and pictures of car wrecks and starlets’ tits? Oh, what an informed source.” She laughed harshly.

“No need to be obscene. The story was right there in black and white. The woman—his wife if she really was—was riding on the backseat and he skidded on the pavement and they went smack into the side of a moving van. They gave him a breathalyzer test on the spot, the article said. Right…on…the spot.” She emphasized intensifier, preposition, and object by tapping a knitting needle against the arm of her rocker.

“Then why isn’t he in prison?”

“These famous fellows always know people,” she said with calm certainty. “There are ways to get out of everything, if you’re rich enough. Just look at what those Kennedy boys have gotten away with.”

“Was he tried in court?”

“I told you, they gave him a—”

“You said that, Mother. But was he drunk?”

“I told you he was drunk!” Spots of color had begun to creep into her cheeks. “They don’t give you a breathalyzer test if you’re sober! His wife died! It was just like that Chappaquiddick business! Just like it!”

“I’m going to move into town,” Susan said slowly. “I’ve been meaning to tell you. I should have done it a long time ago, Mom. For both of us. I was talking to Babs Griffen, and she says there’s a nice little four-room place on Sister’s Lane—”

“Oh, she’s offended!” Mrs Norton remarked to the air. “Someone just spoiled her pretty picture of Mr Ben Big-shot Mears and she’s just so mad she could spit.” This line had been particularly effective some years back.

“Mom, what’s happened to you?” Susan asked a little despairingly. “You never used to…to get this low—”

Ann Norton’s head jerked up. Her knitting slid off her lap as she stood up, clapped her hands to Susan’s shoulders, and gave her a smart shake.

“You listen to me! I won’t have you running around like a common trollop with some sissy boy who’s got your head all filled up with moonlight. Do you hear me?”

Susan slapped her across the face.

Ann Norton’s eyes blinked and then opened wide in stunned surprise. They looked at each other for a moment in silence, shocked. A tiny sound came and died in Susan’s throat.

“I’m going upstairs,” she said. “I’ll be out by Tuesday at the latest.”

“Floyd was here,” Mrs Norton said. Her face was still rigid from the slap. Her daughter’s finger marks stood out in red, like exclamation points.

“I’m through with Floyd,” Susan said tonelessly. “Get used to the idea. Tell your harpy friend Mabel all about it on the telephone, why don’t you? Maybe then it will seem real to you.”

“Floyd loves you, Susan. This is…ruining him. He broke down and told me everything. He poured out his heart to me.” Her eyes shone with the memory of it. “He broke down at the end and cried like a baby.”

Susan thought how unlike Floyd that was. She wondered if her mother could be making it up, and knew by her eyes that she was not.

“Is that what you want for me, Mom? A crybaby? Or did you just fall in love with the idea of blond-haired grandchildren? I suppose I bother you—you can’t feel your job is complete until you see me married and settled down to a good man you can put your thumb on. Settled down with a fellow who’ll get me pregnant and turn me into a matron in a hurry. That’s the scoop, isn’t it? Well, what about what I want?”

“Susan, you don’t know what you want.”

And she said it with such absolute, convinced certainty that for a moment Susan was tempted to believe her. An image came to her of herself and her mother, standing here in set positions, her mother by her rocker and she by the door; only they were tied together by a hank of green yarn, a cord that had grown frayed and weak from many restless tuggings. Image transformed into her mother in a nimrod’s hat, the band sportily pierced with many different flies. Trying desperately to reel in a large trout wearing a yellow print shift. Trying to reel it in for the last time and pop it away in the wicker creel. But for what purpose? To mount it? To eat it?

“No, Mom. I know exactly what I want. Ben Mears.”

She turned and went up the stairs.

Her mother ran after her and called up shrilly: “You can’t get a room! You haven’t any money!”

“I’ve got a hundred in checking and three hundred in savings,” Susan replied calmly. “And I can get a job down at Spencer’s, I think. Mr Labree has offered several times.”

“All he’ll care about is looking up your dress,” Mrs Norton said, but her voice had gone down an octave. Much of her anger had left her and she felt a little frightened.

“Let him,” Susan said. “I’ll wear bloomers.”

“Honey, don’t be mad.” She came two steps up the stairs. “I only want what’s best for—”

“Spare it, Mom. I’m sorry I slapped you. That was awful of me. I do love you. But I’m moving out. It’s way past time. You must see that.”

“You think it over,” Mrs Norton said, now clearly sorry as well as frightened. “I still don’t think I spoke out of turn. That Ben Mears, I’ve seen showboats like him before. All he’s interested in is—”

“No. No more.”

She turned away.

Her mother came up another step and called after her: “When Floyd left here he was in an awful state. He—”

But the door to Susan’s room closed and cut off her words.

She lay down on her bed—which had been decorated with stuffed toys and a poodle dog with a transistor radio in its belly not so long ago—and lay looking at the wall, trying not to think. There were a number of Sierra Club posters on the wall, but not so long ago she had been surrounded by posters clipped from Rolling Stone and Creem and Crawdaddy, pictures of her idols—Jim Morrison and John Lennon and Dave van Ronk and Chuck Berry. The ghost of those days seemed to crowd in on her like bad time exposures of the mind.

She could almost see the newsprint, standing out on the cheap pulp stock. going-places young writer and young wife involved in “maybe” motorcycle fatality. The rest in carefully couched innuendoes. Perhaps a picture taken at the scene by a local photographer, too gory for the local paper, just right for Mabel’s kind.

And the worst was that a seed of doubt had been planted. Stupid. Did you think he was in cold storage before he came back here? That he came wrapped in a germ-proof cellophane bag, like a motel drinking glass? Stupid. Yet the seed had been planted. And for that she could feel something more than adolescent pique for her mother—she could feel something black that bordered on hate.

She shut the thoughts—not out but away—and put an arm over her face and drifted into an uncomfortable doze that was broken by the shrill of the telephone downstairs, then more sharply by her mother’s voice calling, “Susan! It’s for you!”

She went downstairs, noticing it was just after five-thirty. The sun was in the west. Mrs Norton was in the kitchen, beginning supper. Her father wasn’t home yet.

“Hello?”

“Susan?” The voice was familiar, but she could not put a name to it immediately.

“Yes, who’s this?”

“Eva Miller, Susan. I’ve got some bad news.”

“Has something happened to Ben?” All the spit seemed to have gone out of her mouth. Her hand came up and touched her throat. Mrs Norton had come to the kitchen door and was watching, a spatula held in one hand.

“Well, there was a fight. Floyd Tibbits showed up here this afternoon—”

“Floyd!”

Mrs Norton winced at her tone.

“—and I said Mr Mears was sleeping. He said all right, just as polite as ever, but he was dressed awful funny. I asked him if he felt all right. He had on an old-fashioned overcoat and a funny hat and he kept his hands in his pockets. I never thought to mention it to Mr Mears when he got up. There’s been so much excitement—”

“What happened?” Susan nearly screamed.

“Well, Floyd beat him up,” Eva said unhappily. “Right out in my parking lot. Sheldon Corson and Ed Craig went out and dragged him off.”

“Ben. Is Ben all right?”

“I guess not.”

“What is it?” She was holding the phone very tightly.

“Floyd got in one last crack and sent Mr Mears back against that little foreign car of his, and he hit his head. Carl Foreman took him over to Cumberland Receiving, and he was unconscious. I don’t know anything else. If you—”

She hung up, ran to the closet, and pulled her coat off the hanger.

“Susan, what is it?”

“That nice boy Floyd Tibbits,” Susan said, hardly aware that she had begun to cry. “He’s put Ben in the hospital.”

She ran out without waiting for a reply.


TWO

She got to the hospital at six-thirty and sat in an uncomfortable plastic contour chair, staring blankly at a copy of Good Housekeeping. And I’m the only one, she thought. How damned awful. She had thought of calling Matt Burke, but the thought of the doctor coming back and finding her gone had stopped her.

The minutes crawled by on the waiting room clock, and at ten minutes of seven, a doctor with a sheaf of papers in one hand stepped through the door and said, “Miss Norton?”

“That’s right. Is Ben all right?”

“That’s not an answerable question at this point.” He saw the dread come into her face and added: “He seems to be, but we’ll want him here for two or three days. He’s got a hairline fracture, multiple bruises, contusions, and one hell of a black eye.”

“Can I see him?”

“No, not tonight. He’s been sedated.”

“For a minute? Please? One minute?”

He sighed. “You can look in on him, if you like. He’ll probably be asleep. I don’t want you to say anything to him unless he speaks to you.”

He took her up to the third floor and then down to a room at the far end of a medicinal-smelling corridor. The man in the other bed was reading a magazine and looked up at them desultorily.

Ben was lying with his eyes closed, a sheet pulled up to his chin. He was so pale and still that for one terrified moment Susan was sure he was dead; that he had just slipped away while she and the doctor had been talking downstairs. Then she marked the slow, steady rise and fall of his chest and felt a relief so great that she swayed a little on her feet. She looked at his face closely, hardly noticing the way it had been marked. Sissy boy, her mother had called him, and Susan could see how she might have gotten that idea. His features were strong but sensitive (she wished there was a better word than “sensitive” that was the word you used to describe the local librarian who wrote stilted Spenserian sonnets to daffodils in his spare time; but it was the only word that fit). Only his hair seemed virile in the traditional sense. Black and heavy, it seemed almost to float above his face. The white bandage on the left side above the temple stood out in sharp, telling contrast.

I love the man, she thought. Get well, Ben. Get well and finish your book so we can go away from the Lot together, if you want me. The Lot has turned bad for both of us.

“I think you’d better leave now,” the doctor said. “Perhaps tomorrow—”

Ben stirred and made a thick sound in his throat. His eyelids opened slowly, closed, opened again. His eyes were dark with sedation, but the knowledge of her presence was in them. He moved his hand over hers. Tears spilled out of her eyes and she smiled and squeezed his hand.

He moved his lips and she bent to hear.

“They’re real killers in this town, aren’t they?”

“Ben, I’m so sorry.”

“I think I knocked out two of his teeth before he decked me,” Ben whispered. “Not bad for a writer fella.”

“Ben—”

“I think that will be enough, Mr Mears,” the doctor said. “Give the airplane glue a chance to set.”

Ben shifted his eyes to the doctor. “Just a minute.”

The doctor rolled his eyes. “That’s what she said.”

Ben’s eyelids slipped down again, then came up with difficulty. He said something unintelligible.

Susan bent closer. “What, darling?”

“Is it dark yet?”

“Yes.”

“Want you to go see…”

“Matt?”

He nodded. “Tell him…I said for you to be told everything. Ask him if he…knows Father Callahan. He’ll understand.”

“Okay,” Susan said. “I’ll give him the message. You sleep now. Sleep well, Ben.”

“’Kay. Love you.” He muttered something else, twice, and then his eyes closed. His breathing deepened.

“What did he say?” the doctor asked.

Susan was frowning. “It sounded like ‘Lock the windows,’” she said.


THREE

Eva Miller and Weasel Craig were in the waiting room when she went back to get her coat. Eva was wearing an old fall coat with a rusty fur collar, obviously kept for best, and Weasel was floating in an outsized motorcycle jacket. Susan warmed at the sight of both of them.

“How is he?” Eva asked.

“Going to be all right, I think.” She repeated the doctor’s diagnosis, and Eva’s face relaxed.

“I’m so glad. Mr Mears seems like a very nice man. Nothing like this has ever happened at my place. And Parkins Gillespie had to lock Floyd up in the drunk tank. He didn’t act drunk, though. Just sort of…dopey and confused.”

Susan shook her head. “It doesn’t sound like Floyd at all.”

There was a moment of uncomfortable silence.

“Ben’s a lovely fella,” Weasel said, and patted Susan’s hand. “He’ll be up and about in no time. You wait and see.”

“I’m sure he will be,” Susan said, and squeezed his hand in both of hers. “Eva, isn’t Father Callahan the priest at St Andrew’s?”

“Yes, why?”

“Oh…curious. Listen, thank you both for coming. If you could come back tomorrow—”

“We’ll do that,” Weasel said. “Sure we will, won’t we, Eva?” He slipped an arm about her waist. It was a long reach, but he got there eventually.

“Yes, we will.”

Susan walked out to the parking lot with them and then drove back to Jerusalem’s Lot.


FOUR

Matt did not answer at her knock or yell Come in! as he usually did. Instead, a very careful voice which she hardly recognized said, “Who is it?” very quietly from the other side.

“Susie Norton, Mr Burke.”

He opened the door and she felt real shock at the change in him. He looked old and haggard. A moment after that, she saw that he was wearing a heavy gold crucifix. There was something so strange and ludicrous about that ornate five-and-dime corpus lying against his checked flannel shirt that she almost laughed—but didn’t.

“Come in. Where’s Ben?”

She told him and his face grew long. “So Floyd Tibbits of all people decides to play wronged lover, is that it? Well, it couldn’t have happened at a more inopportune time. Mike Ryerson was brought back from Portland late this afternoon for burial preparations at Foreman’s. And I suppose our trip up to the Marsten House will have to be put off—”

“What trip? What’s this about Mike?”

“Would you like coffee?” he asked absently.

“No. I want to find out what’s going on. Ben said you know.”

“That,” he said, “is a very tall order. Easy for Ben to say I’m to tell you everything. Harder to do. But I will try.”

“What—”

He held up one hand. “One thing first, Susan. You and your mother went down to the new shop the other day.”

Susan’s brow furrowed. “Sure. Why?”

“Can you give me your impressions of the place, and more specifically, of the man who runs it?”

“Mr Straker?”

“Yes.”

“Well, he’s quite charming,” she said. “Courtly might be an even better word. He complimented Glynis Mayberry on her dress and she blushed like a schoolgirl. And asked Mrs Boddin about the bandage on her arm…she spilled some hot fat on it, you know. He gave her a recipe for a poultice. Wrote it right down. And when Mabel came in…” She laughed a bit at the memory.

“Yes?”

“He got her a chair,” Susan said. “Not a chair, actually, but a chair. More like a throne. A great carved mahogany thing. He brought it out of the back room all by himself, smiling and chatting with the other ladies all the time. But it must have weighed at least three hundred pounds. He plonked it down in the middle of the floor and escorted Mabel to it. Took her arm, you know. And she was giggling. If you’ve seen Mabel giggling, you’ve seen everything. And he served coffee. Very strong but very good.”

“Did you like him?” Matt asked, watching her closely.

“This is all a part of it, isn’t it?” she asked.

“It might be, yes.”

“All right, then. I’ll give you a woman’s reaction. I did and I didn’t. I was attracted to him in a mildly sexual way, I guess. Older man, very urbane, very charming, very courtly. You know looking at him that he could order from a French menu and know what wine would go with what, not just red or white but the year and even the vineyard. Very definitely not the run of fellow you see around here. But not effeminate in the least. Lithe, like a dancer. And of course there’s something attractive about a man who is so unabashedly bald.” She smiled a little defensively, knowing there was color in her cheeks, wondering if she had said more than she intended.

“But then you didn’t,” Matt said.

She shrugged. “That’s harder to put my finger on. I think…I think I sensed a certain contempt under the surface. A cynicism. As if he were playing a certain part, and playing it well, but as if he knew he wouldn’t have to pull out all the stops to fool us. A touch of condescension.” She looked at him uncertainly. “And there seemed to be something a little bit cruel about him. I don’t really know why.”

“Did anyone buy anything?”

“Not much, but he didn’t seem to mind. Mom bought a little knick-knack shelf from Yugoslavia, and that Mrs Petrie bought a lovely little drop-leaf table, but that was all I saw. He didn’t seem to mind. Just urged people to tell their friends he was open, to come back by and not be strangers. Very Old World charming.”

“And do you think people were charmed?”

“By and large, yes,” Susan said, mentally comparing her mother’s enthusiastic impression of R.T. Straker to her immediate dislike of Ben.

“You didn’t see his partner?”

“Mr Barlow? No, he’s in New York, on a buying trip.”

“Is he?” Matt said, speaking to himself. “I wonder. The elusive Mr Barlow.”

“Mr Burke, don’t you think you better tell me what all this is about?”

He sighed heavily.

“I suppose I must try. What you’ve just told me is disturbing. Very disturbing. It all fits so well…”

“What? What does?”

“I have to start,” he began, “with meeting Mike Ryerson in Dell’s tavern last night…which already seems a century ago.”


FIVE

It was twenty after eight by the time he had finished, and they had both drunk two cups of coffee.

“I believe that’s everything,” Matt said. “And now shall I do my Napoleon imitation? Tell you about my astral conversations with Toulouse-Lautrec?”

“Don’t be silly,” she said. “There’s something going on, but not what you think. You must know that.”

“I did until last night.”

“If no one has it in for you, as Ben suggested, then maybe Mike did it himself. In a delirium or something.” That sounded thin, but she pushed ahead anyway. “Or maybe you fell asleep without knowing and dreamed the whole thing. I’ve dozed off without knowing it before and lost a whole fifteen or twenty minutes.”

He shrugged tiredly. “How does a person defend testimony no rational mind will accept at face value? I heard what I heard. I was not asleep. And something has me worried…rather badly worried. According to the old literature, a vampire cannot simply walk into a man’s house and suck his blood. No. He has to be invited. But Mike Ryerson invited Danny Glick in last night. And I invited Mike myself!”

“Matt, has Ben told you about his new book?”

He fiddled with his pipe but didn’t light it. “Very little. Only that it’s somehow connected with the Marsten House.”

“Has he told you he had a very traumatic experience in the Marsten House as a boy?”

He looked up sharply. “In it? No.”

“He went in on a dare. He wanted to join a club, and the initiation was for him to go into the Marsten House and bring something out. He did, as a matter of fact—but before he left, he went up to the second-floor bedroom where Hubie Marsten hung himself. When he opened the door, he saw Hubie hanging there. He opened his eyes. Ben ran. That’s festered in him for twenty-four years. He came back to the Lot to try to write it out of his system.”

“Christ,” Matt said.

“He has…a certain theory about the Marsten House. It springs partly from his own experience and partly from some rather amazing research he’s done on Hubert Marsten—”

“His penchant for devil worship?”

She started. “How did you know that?”

He smiled a trifle grimly. “Not all the gossip in a small town is open gossip. There are secrets. Some of the secret gossip in ’salem’s Lot has to do with Hubie Marsten. It’s shared among perhaps only a dozen or so of the older people now—Mabel Werts is one of them. It was a long time ago, Susan. But even so, there is no statute of limitations on some stories. It’s strange, you know. Even Mabel won’t talk about Hubert Marsten with anyone but her own circle. They’ll talk about his death, of course. About the murder. But if you ask about the ten years he and his wife spent up there in their house, doing God knows what, a sort of governor comes into play—perhaps the closest thing to a taboo our Western civilization knows. There have even been whispers that Hubert Marsten kidnapped and sacrificed small children to his infernal gods. I’m surprised Ben found out as much as he did. The secrecy concerning that aspect of Hubie and his wife and his house is almost tribal.”

“He didn’t come by it in the Lot.”

“That explains it, then. I suspect his theory is a rather old parapsychological wheeze—that humans manufacture evil just as they manufacture snot or excrement or fingernail parings. That it doesn’t go away. Specifically, that the Marsten House may have become a kind of evil dry-cell; a malign storage battery.”

“Yes. He expressed it in exactly those terms.” She looked at him wonderingly.

He gave a dry chuckle. “We’ve read the same books. And what do you think, Susan? Is there more than heaven and earth in your philosophy?”

“No,” she said with quiet firmness. “Houses are only houses. Evil dies with the perpetration of evil acts.”

“You’re suggesting that Ben’s instability may enable me to lead him down the path to insanity that I am already traversing?”

“No, of course not. I don’t think you’re insane. But Mr Burke, you must realize—”

“Be quiet.”

He had cocked his head forward. She stopped talking and listened. Nothing…except perhaps a creaky board. She looked at him questioningly, and he shook his head. “You were saying?”

“Only that coincidence has made this a poor time for him to exorcise the demons of his youth. There’s been a lot of cheap talk going around town since the Marsten House was reoccupied and that store was opened…there’s been talk about Ben himself, for that matter. Rites of exorcism have been known to get out of hand and turn on the exorcist. I think Ben needs to get out of this town and I think maybe you could use a vacation from it, Mr Burke.”

Exorcism made her think of Ben’s request to mention the Catholic priest to Matt. On impulse, she decided not to. The reason he had asked was now clear enough, but it would only be adding fuel to a fire that was, in her opinion, already dangerously high. When Ben asked her—if he ever did—she would say she had forgotten.

“I know how mad it must sound,” Matt said. “Even to me, who heard the window go up, and that laugh, and saw the screen lying beside the driveway this morning. But if it will allay your fears any, I must say that Ben’s reaction to the whole thing was very sensible. He suggested we put the thing on the basis of a theory to be proved or disproved, and begin by—” He ceased again, listening.

This time the silence spun out, and when he spoke again, the soft certainty in his voice frightened her. “There’s someone upstairs.”

She listened. Nothing.

“You’re imagining things.”

“I know my house,” he said softly. “Someone is in the guest bedroom…there, you hear?”

And this time she did hear. The audible creak of a board, creaking the way boards in old houses do, for no good reason at all. But to Susan’s ears there seemed to be something more—something unutterably sly—in that sound.

“I’m going upstairs,” he said.

“No!”

The word came out with no thought. She told herself: Now who’s sitting in the chimney corner, believing the wind in the eaves is a banshee?

“I was frightened last night and did nothing and things grew worse. Now I am going upstairs.”

“Mr Burke—”

They had both begun to speak in undertones. Tension had wormed into her veins, making her muscles stiff. Maybe there was someone upstairs. A prowler.

“Talk,” he said. “After I go, continue speaking. On any subject.”

And before she could argue, he was out of his seat and moving toward the hall, moving with a grace that was nearly astounding. He looked back once, but she couldn’t read his eyes. He began to go up the stairs.

Her mind felt dazed into unreality by the swift turnaround things had taken. Less than two minutes ago they had been discussing this business calmly, under the rational light of electric bulbs. And now she was afraid. Question: If you put a psychologist in a room with a man who thinks he’s Napoleon and leave them there for a year (or ten or twenty), will you end up with two Skinner men or two guys with their hands in their shirts? Answer: Insufficient data.

She opened her mouth and said, “Ben and I were going to drive up Route 1 to Camden on Sunday—you know, the town where they filmed Peyton Place—but now I guess we’ll have to wait. They have the most darling little church…”

She found herself droning along with great facility, even though her hands were clenched together in her lap tightly enough to whiten the knuckles. Her mind was clear, still unimpressed with this talk of bloodsuckers and the undead. It was from her spinal cord, a much older network of nerves and ganglia, that the black dread emanated in waves.


SIX

Going up the stairs was the hardest thing Matt Burke had ever done in his life. That was all; that was it. Nothing else even came close. Except perhaps one thing.

As a boy of eight, he had been in a Cub Scout pack. The den mother’s house was a mile up the road and going was fine, yes, excellent, because you walked in the late afternoon daylight. But coming home twilight had begun to fall, freeing the shadows to yawn across the road in long, twisty patterns—or, if the meeting was particularly enthusiastic and ran late, you had to walk home in the dark. Alone.

Alone. Yes, that’s the key word, the most awful word in the English tongue. Murder doesn’t hold a candle to it and hell is only a poor synonym…

There was a ruined church along the way, an old Methodist meetinghouse, which reared its shambles at the far end of a frost-heaved and hummocked lawn, and when you walked past the view of its glaring, senseless windows your footsteps became very loud in your ears and whatever you had been whistling died on your lips and you thought about how it must be inside—the overturned pews, the rotting hymnals, the crumbling altar where only mice now kept the sabbath, and you wondered what might be in there besides mice—what madmen, what monsters. Maybe they were peering out at you with yellow reptilian eyes. And maybe one night watching would not be enough; maybe some night that splintered, crazily hung door would be thrown open, and what you saw standing there would drive you to lunacy at one look.

And you couldn’t explain that to your mother and father, who were creatures of the light. No more than you could explain to them how, at the age of three, the spare blanket at the foot of the crib turned into a collection of snakes that lay staring at you with flat and lidless eyes. No child ever conquers those fears, he thought. If a fear cannot be articulated, it can’t be conquered. And the fears locked in small brains are much too large to pass through the orifice of the mouth. Sooner or later you found someone to walk past all the deserted meetinghouses you had to pass between grinning babyhood and grunting senility. Until tonight. Until tonight when you found out that none of the old fears had been staked—only tucked away in their tiny, child-sized coffins with a wild rose on top.

He didn’t turn on the light. He mounted the steps, one by one, avoiding the sixth, which creaked. He held on to the crucifix, and his palm was sweaty and slick.

He reached the top and turned soundlessly to look down the hall. The guest room door was ajar. He had left it shut. From downstairs came the steady murmur of Susan’s voice.

Walking carefully to avoid squeaks, he went down to the door and stood in front of it. The basis of all human fears, he thought. A closed door, slightly ajar.

He reached out and pushed it open.

Mike Ryerson was lying on the bed.

Moonlight flooded in the windows and silvered the room, turning it into a lagoon of dreams. Matt shook his head, as if to clear it. Almost it seemed as though he had moved backward in time, that it was the night before. He would go downstairs and call Ben because Ben wasn’t in the hospital yet—

Mike opened his eyes.

They glittered for just a moment in the moonlight, silver rimmed with red. They were as blank as washed blackboards. There was no human thought or feeling in them. The eyes are the windows of the soul, Wordsworth had said. If so, these windows looked in on an empty room.

Mike sat up, the sheet falling from his chest, and Matt saw the heavy industrial stitchwork where the M.E. or pathologist had repaired the work of his autopsy, perhaps whistling as he sewed.

Mike smiled, and his canines and incisors were white and sharp. The smile itself was a mere flexing of the muscles around the mouth; it never touched the eyes. They retained their original dead blankness.

Mike said very clearly, “Look at me.”

Matt looked. Yes, the eyes were utterly blank. But very deep. You could almost see little silver cameos of yourself in those eyes, drowning sweetly, making the world seem unimportant, making fears seem unimportant—

He stepped backward and cried out, “No! No!”

And held the crucifix out.

Whatever had been Mike Ryerson hissed as if hot water had been thrown in its face. Its arms went up as if to ward off a blow. Matt took a step into the room; Ryerson took a compensatory one backward.

“Get out of here!” Matt croaked. “I revoke my invitation!”

Ryerson screamed, a high, ululating sound full of hate and pain. He took four shambling steps backward. The backs of the knees struck the ledge of the open window, and Ryerson tottered past the edge of balance.

“I will see you sleep like the dead, teacher.”

It fell outward into the night, going backward with its hands thrown out above its head, like a diver going off a high board. The pallid body gleamed like marble, in hard and depthless contrast to the black stitches that crisscrossed the torso in a Y pattern.

Matt let out a crazed, terrified wail and rushed to the window and peered out. There was nothing to be seen but the moon-gilded night—and suspended in the air below the window and above the spill of light that marked the living room, a dancing pattern of motes that might have been dust. They whirled, coalesced in a pattern that was hideously humanoid, and then dissipated into nothing.

He turned to run, and that was when the pain filled his chest and made him stagger. He clutched at it and doubled over. The pain seemed to be coming up his arm in steady, pulsing waves. The crucifix swung below his eyes.

He walked out the door holding his forearms crossed before his chest, the chain of the crucifix still caught in his right hand. The image of Mike Ryerson hanging in the dark air like some pallid high-diver hung before him.

“Mr Burke!”

“My doctor is James Cody,” he said through lips that were as cold as snow. “It’s on the phone reminder. I’m having a heart attack, I think.”

He collapsed in the upper hall, facedown.


SEVEN

She dialed the number marked beside jimmy cody, pill-pusher. The legend was written in the neat block capitals she remembered so well from her school days. A woman’s voice answered and Susan said, “Is the doctor home? Emergency!”

“Yes,” the woman said calmly. “Here he is.”

“Dr Cody speaking.”

“This is Susan Norton. I’m at Mr Burke’s house. He’s had a heart attack.”

“Who? Matt Burke?”

“Yes. He’s unconscious. What should I—”

“Call an ambulance,” he said. “In Cumberland that’s 841–4000. Stay with him. Put a blanket over him but don’t move him. Do you understand?”

“Yes.”

“I’ll be there in twenty minutes.”

“Will you—”

But the phone clicked, and she was alone.

She called for an ambulance and then she was alone again, faced with going back upstairs to him.


EIGHT

She stared at the stairwell with a trepidation which was amazing to her. She found herself wishing that none of it had happened, not so that Matt could be all right, but so she would not have to feel this sick, shaken fear. Her unbelief had been total—she saw Matt’s perceptions of the previous night as something to be defined in terms of her accepted realities, nothing more or less. And now that firm unbelief was gone from beneath her and she felt herself falling.

She had heard Matt’s voice and had heard a terrible toneless incantation: I will see you sleep like the dead, teacher. The voice that had spoken those words had no more human quality than a dog’s bark.

She went back upstairs, forcing her body through every step. Even the hall light did not help much. Matt lay where she had left him, his face turned sideways so the right cheek lay against the threadbare nap of the hall runner, breathing in harsh, tearing gasps. She bent and undid the top two buttons of his shirt and his breathing seemed to ease a little. Then she went into the guest bedroom to get a blanket.

The room was cool. The window stood open. The bed had been stripped except for the mattress pad, but there were blankets stacked on the top shelf of the closet. As she turned back to the hall, something on the floor near the window glittered in the moonlight and she stooped and picked it up. She recognized it immediately. A Cumberland Consolidated High School class ring. The initials engraved on the inner curve were M.C.R.

Michael Corey Ryerson.

For that moment, in the dark, she believed. She believed it all. A scream rose in her throat and she choked it unvoiced, but the ring tumbled from her fingers and lay on the floor below the window, glinting in the moonlight that rode the autumn dark.





Chapter Ten

The Lot (III)

The town knew about darkness.

It knew about the darkness that comes on the land when rotation hides the land from the sun, and about the darkness of the human soul. The town is an accumulation of three parts which, in sum, are greater than the sections. The town is the people who live there, the buildings which they have erected to den or do business in, and it is the land. The people are Scotch-English and French. There are others, of course—a smattering, like a fistful of pepper thrown in a pot of salt, but not many. This melting pot never melted very much. The buildings are nearly all constructed of honest wood. Many of the older houses are saltboxes and most of the stores are false fronted, although no one could have said why. The people know there is nothing behind those façades just as most of them know that Loretta Starcher wears falsies. The land is granite-bodied and covered with a thin, easily ruptured skin of topsoil. Farming it is a thankless, sweaty, miserable, crazy business. The harrow turns up great chunks of the granite underlayer and breaks on them. In May you take out your truck as soon as the ground is dry enough to support it, and you and your boys fill it up with rocks perhaps a dozen times before harrowing and dump them in the great weed-choked pile where you have dumped them since 1955, when you first took this tiger by the balls. And when you have picked them until the dirt won’t come out from under your nails when you wash and your fingers feel huge and numb and oddly large-pored, you hitch your harrow to your tractor and before you’ve broken two rows you bust one of the blades on a rock you missed. And putting on a new blade, getting your oldest boy to hold up the hitch so you can get at it, the first mosquito of the new season buzzes bloodthirstily past your ear with that eye-watering hum that always makes you think it’s the sound loonies must hear just before they kill all their kids or close their eyes on the Interstate and put the gas pedal to the floor or tighten their toe on the trigger of the .30-.30 they just jammed into their quackers; and then your boy’s sweat-slicked fingers slip and one of the other round harrow blades scrapes skin from your arm and looking around in that kind of despairing, heartless flicker of time, when it seems you could just give it all over and take up drinking or go down to the bank that holds your mortgage and declare bankruptcy, at that moment of hating the land and the soft suck of gravity that holds you to it, you also love it and understand how it knows darkness and has always known it. The land has got you, locked up solid got you, and the house, and the woman you fell in love with when you started high school (only she was a girl then, and you didn’t know for shit about girls except you got one and hung on to her and she wrote your name all over her book covers and first you broke her in and then she broke you in and then neither one of you had to worry about that mess anymore), and the kids have got you, the kids that were started in the creaky double bed with the splintered headboard. You and she made the kids after the darkness fell—six kids, or seven, or ten. The bank has you, and the car dealership, and the Sears store in Lewiston, and John Deere in Brunswick. But most of all the town has you because you know it the way you know the shape of your wife’s breast. You know who will be hanging around Crossen’s store in the daytime because Knapp Shoe laid him off and you know who is having woman trouble even before he knows it, the way Reggie Sawyer is having it, with that phone-company kid dipping his wick in Bonnie Sawyer’s barrel; you know where the roads go and where, on Friday afternoon, you and Hank and Nolly Gardener can go and park and drink a couple of six-packs or a couple of cases. You know how the ground lies and you know how to get through the Marshes in April without getting the tops of your boots wet. You know it all. And it knows you, how your crotch aches from the tractor saddle when the day’s harrowing is done and how the lump on your back was just a cyst and nothing to worry about like the doctor said at first it might be, and how your mind works over the bills that come in during the last week of the month. It sees through your lies, even the ones you tell yourself, like how you are going to take the wife and the kids to Disneyland next year or the year after that, like how you can afford the payments on a new color TV if you cut cordwood next fall, like how everything is going to come out all right. Being in the town is a daily act of utter intercourse, so complete that it makes what you and your wife do in the squeaky bed look like a handshake. Being in the town is prosaic, sensuous, alcoholic. And in the dark, the town is yours and you are the town’s and together you sleep like the dead, like the very stones in your north field. There is no life here but the slow death of days, and so when the evil falls on the town, its coming seems almost preordained, sweet and morphic. It is almost as though the town knows the evil was coming and the shape it would take.

The town has its secrets, and keeps them well. The people don’t know them all. They know old Albie Crane’s wife ran off with a traveling man from New York City—or they think they know it. But Albie cracked her skull open after the traveling man had left her cold and then he tied a block on her feet and tumbled her down the old well and twenty years later Albie died peacefully in his bed of a heart attack, just as his son Joe will die later in this story, and perhaps someday a kid will stumble on the old well where it is hidden by choked blackberry creepers and pull back the whitened, weather-smoothed boards and see that crumbling skeleton staring blankly up from the bottom of that rock-lined pit, the sweet traveling man’s necklace still dangling, green and mossy, over her rib cage.

They know that Hubie Marsten killed his wife, but they don’t know what he made her do first, or how it was with them in that sun-sticky kitchen in the moments before he blew her head in, with the smell of honeysuckle hanging in the hot air like the gagging sweetness of an uncovered charnel pit. They don’t know that she begged him to do it.

Some of the older women in town—Mabel Werts, Glynis Mayberry, Audrey Hersey—remember that Larry McLeod found some charred papers in the upstairs fireplace, but none of them know that the papers were the accumulation of twelve years’ correspondence between Hubert Marsten and an amusingly antique Austrian nobleman named Breichen, or that the correspondence of these two had commenced through the offices of a rather peculiar Boston book merchant who died an extremely nasty death in 1933, or that Hubie had burned each and every letter before hanging himself, feeding them to the fire one at a time, watching the flames blacken and char the thick, cream-colored paper and obliterate the elegant, spider-thin calligraphy. They don’t know he was smiling as he did it, the way Larry Crockett now smiles over the fabulous land-title papers that reside in the safe-deposit box of his Portland bank.

They know that Coretta Simons, old Jumpin’ Simons’s widow, is dying slowly and horribly of intestinal cancer, but they don’t know that there is better than thirty thousand dollars cash tucked away behind the dowdy sitting room wallpaper, the results of an insurance policy she collected but never invested and now, in her last extremity, has forgotten entirely.

They know that a fire burned up half of the town in that smoke-hazed September of 1951, but they don’t know that it was set, and they don’t know that the boy who set it graduated valedictorian of his class in 1953 and went on to make a hundred thousand dollars on Wall Street, and even if they had known, they would not have known the compulsion that drove him to it or the way it ate at his mind for the next twenty years of his life, until a brain embolism hustled him into his grave at the age of forty-six.

They don’t know that the Reverend John Groggins has sometimes awakened in the midnight hour with horrible dreams still vivid beneath his bald pate—dreams in which he preaches to the Little Misses’ Thursday Night Bible Class naked and slick, and they ready for him; or that Floyd Tibbits wandered around for all of that Friday in a sickly daze, feeling the sun lie hatefully against his strangely pallid skin, remembering going to Ann Norton only cloudily, not remembering his attack on Ben Mears at all, but remembering the cool gratitude with which he greeted the setting of the sun, the gratitude and the anticipation of something great and good; or that Hal Griffen has six hot books hidden in the back of his closet which he masturbates over at every opportunity; or that George Middler has a suitcase full of silk slips and bras and panties and stockings and that he sometimes pulls down the shades of his apartment over the hardware store and locks the door with both the bolt and the chain and then stands in front of the full-length mirror in the bedroom until his breath comes in short stitches and then he falls to his knees and masturbates; or that Carl Foreman tried to scream and was unable when Mike Ryerson began to tremble coldly on the metal worktable in the room beneath the mortuary and the scream was as sightless and soundless as glass in his throat when Mike opened his eyes and sat up; or that ten-month-old Randy McDougall did not even struggle when Danny Glick slipped through his bedroom window and plucked the baby from his crib and sank his teeth into a neck still bruised from a mother’s blows.

These are the town’s secrets, and some will later be known and some will never be known. The town keeps them all with the ultimate poker face.

The town cares for devil’s work no more than it cares for God’s or man’s. It knew darkness. And darkness was enough.


TWO

Sandy McDougall knew something was wrong when she woke up, but couldn’t tell what. The other side of the bed was empty; it was Roy’s day off, and he had gone fishing with some friends. Would be back around noon. Nothing was burning and she didn’t hurt anywhere. So what could be wrong?

The sun. The sun was wrong.

It was high up on the wallpaper, dancing through the shadows cast by the maple outside the window. But Randy always woke her before the sun got up high enough to throw the maple’s shadow on the wall—

Her startled eyes jumped to the clock on the dresser. It was ten minutes after nine.

Trepidation rose in her throat.

“Randy?” she called, her dressing gown billowing out behind her as she flew down the narrow hall of the trailer. “Randy, honey?”

The baby’s bedroom was bathed in submerged light from the one small window above the crib…open. But she had closed it when she went to bed. She always closed it.

The crib was empty.

“Randy?” she whispered.

And saw him.

The small body, still clad in wash-faded Dr Dentons, had been flung into the corner like a piece of garbage. One leg stuck up grotesquely, like an inverted exclamation point.

“Randy!”

She fell on her knees by the body, her face marked with the harsh lines of shock. She cradled the child. The body was cool to the touch.

“Randy, honey-baby, wake up, Randy, Randy, wake up—”

The bruises were gone. All gone. They had faded overnight, leaving the small face and form flawless. His color was good. For the only time since his coming she found him beautiful, and she screamed at the sight of the beauty—a horrible, desolate sound.

“Randy! Wake up! Randy? Randy? Randy?”

She got up with him and ran back down the hall, the dressing gown slipping off one shoulder. The high chair still stood in the kitchen, the tray encrusted with Randy’s supper of the night before. She slipped Randy into the chair, which stood in a patch of morning sunlight. Randy’s head lolled against his chest and he slid sideways with a slow and terrible finality until he was lodged in the angle between the tray and one of the chair’s high arms.

“Randy?” she said, smiling. Her eyes bulged from their sockets like flawed blue marbles. She patted his cheeks. “Wake up now, Randy. Breakfast, Randy. Is oo hungwy? Please—oh Jesus, please—”

She whirled away from him and pulled open one of the cabinets over the stove and pawed through it, spilling a box of Rice Chex, a can of Chef Boy-ar-dee ravioli, a bottle of Wesson oil. The Wesson oil bottle shattered, spraying heavy liquid across the stove and floor. She found a small jar of Gerber’s chocolate custard and grabbed one of the plastic Dairy Queen spoons out of the dish drainer.

“Look, Randy. Your favorite. Wake up and see the nice custard. Chocka, Randy. Chocka, chocka.” Rage and terror swept her darkly. “Wake up!” she screamed at him, her spittle beading the translucent skin of his brow and cheeks. “Wake up wake up for the love of God you little shit WAKE UP!”

She pulled the cover off the jar and spooned out some of the chocolate-flavored custard. Her hand, which knew the truth already, was shaking so badly that most of it spilled. She pushed what was left between the small slack lips, and more fell off onto the tray, making horrid plopping sounds. The spoon clashed against his teeth.

“Randy,” she pleaded. “Stop fooling your momma.”

Her other hand stretched out, and she pulled his mouth open with a hooked finger and pushed the rest of the custard into his mouth.

“There,” said Sandy McDougall. A smile, indescribable in its cracked hope, touched her lips. She settled back in her kitchen chair, relaxing muscle by muscle. Now it would be all right. Now he would know she still loved him and he would stop this cruel trickery.

“Good?” she murmured. “Chocka good, Wandy? Will oo make a smile for Mommy? Be Mommy’s good boy and give her a smile.”

She reached out with trembling fingers and pushed up the corners of Randy’s mouth.

The chocolate fell out onto the tray—plop.

She began to scream.


THREE

Tony Glick woke up on Saturday morning when his wife, Marjorie, fell down in the living room.

“Margie?” he called, swinging his feet out onto the floor. “Marge?”

And after a long, long pause, she answered, “I’m okay, Tony.”

He sat on the edge of the bed, looking blankly down at his feet. He was bare-chested and wearing striped pajama bottoms with the drawstring dangling between his legs. The hair on his head stood up in a crow’s nest. It was thick black hair, and both of his sons had inherited it. People thought he was Jewish, but that dago hair should have been a giveaway, he often thought. His grandfather’s name had been Gliccucchi. When someone had told him it was easier to get along in America if you had an American name, something short and snappy, Gramps had had it legally changed to Glick, unaware that he was trading the reality of one minority for the appearance of another. Tony Glick’s body was wide and dark and heavily corded with muscle. His face bore the dazed expression of a man who has been punched out leaving a bar.

He had taken a leave of absence from his job, and during the past work week he had slept a lot. It went away when you slept. There were no dreams in his sleep. He turned in at seven-thirty and got up at ten the next morning and took a nap in the afternoon from two to three. The time he had gone through between the scene he had made at Danny’s funeral and this sunny Saturday morning almost a week later seemed hazy and not real at all. People kept bringing food. Casseroles, preserves, cakes, pies. Margie said she didn’t know what they were going to do with it. Neither of them was hungry. On Wednesday night he had tried to make love to his wife and they had both begun to cry.

Margie didn’t look good at all. Her own method of coping had been to clean the house from top to bottom, and she had cleaned with a maniacal zeal that precluded all other thought. The days resounded with the clash of cleaning buckets and the whirr of the vacuum cleaner, and the air was always redolent with the sharp smells of ammonia and Lysol. She had taken all the clothes and toys, packed neatly into cartons, to the Salvation Army and the Goodwill store. When he had come out of the bedroom on Thursday morning, all those cartons had been lined up by the front door, each neatly labeled. He had never seen anything so horrible in his life as those mute cartons. She had dragged all the rugs out into the backyard, had hung them over the clothesline, and had beaten the dust out of them unmercifully. And even in Tony’s bleary state of consciousness, he had noticed how pale she had seemed since last Tuesday or Wednesday; even her lips seemed to have lost their natural color. Brown shadows had insinuated themselves beneath her eyes.

These thoughts passed through his mind in less time than it takes to tell them, and he was on the verge of tumbling back into bed when she fell down again and this time did not answer his call.

He got up and padded down to the living room and saw her lying on the floor, breathing shallowly and staring with dazed eyes at the ceiling. She had been changing the living room furniture around, and everything was pulled out of position, giving the room an odd disjointed look.

Whatever was wrong with her had advanced during the night, and her appearance was bad enough to cut through his daze like a sharp knife. She was still in her robe and it had split up to mid-thigh. Her legs were the color of marble; all the tan she had picked up that summer on their vacation had faded out of them. Her hands moved like ghosts. Her mouth gaped, as if her lungs could not get enough air, and he noticed the odd prominence of her teeth but thought nothing of it. It could have been the light.

“Margie? Honey?”

She tried to answer, couldn’t, and real fear shot through him. He moved to call the doctor.

He was turning to the phone when she said, “No…no.” The word was repeated between a harsh gasp for air. She had struggled up to a sitting position, and the whole sun-silent house was filled with her rasping struggle for breath.

“Pull me…help me…the sun is so hot…”

He went to her and picked her up, shocked by the lightness of his burden. She seemed to weigh no more than a bundle of sticks.

“…sofa…”

He laid her on it, with her back propped against the armrest. She was out of the patch of sun that fell in a square through the front window and onto the rug, and her breath seemed to come a little easier. She closed her eyes for a moment, and again he was impressed by the smooth whiteness of her teeth in contrast to her lips. He felt an urge to kiss her.

“Let me call the doctor,” he said.

“No. I’m better. The sun was…burning me. Made me feel faint. Better now.” A little color had come back into her cheeks.

“Are you sure?”

“Yes. I’m okay.”

“You’ve been working too hard, honey.”

“Yes,” she said passively. Her eyes were listless.

He ran a hand through his hair, tugging at it. “We’ve got to snap out of this, Margie. We’ve got to. You look…” He paused, not wanting to hurt her.

“I look awful,” she said. “I know. I looked at myself in the bathroom mirror before I went to bed last night, and I hardly seemed to be there. For a minute I…” A smile touched her lips. “I thought I could see the tub behind me. Like there was only a little of myself left and it was…oh, so pale…”

“I want Dr Reardon to look at you.”

But she seemed not to hear. “I’ve had the most lovely dream the last three or four nights, Tony. So real. Danny comes to me in the dream. He says, ‘Mommy, Mommy, I’m so glad to be home!’ And he says…says…”

“What does he say?” he asked her gently.

“He says…that he’s my baby again. My own son, at my breast again. And I give him to suck and…and then a feeling of sweetness with an undertone of bitterness, so much like it was before he was weaned but after he was beginning to get teeth and he would nip—oh, this must sound awful. Like one of those psychiatrist things.”

“No,” he said. “No.”

He knelt beside her and she put her arms around his neck and wept weakly. Her arms were cold. “No doctor, Tony, please. I’ll rest today.”

“All right,” he said. Giving in to her made him feel uneasy.

“It’s such a lovely dream, Tony,” she said, speaking against his throat. The movement of her lips, the muffled hardness of her teeth beneath them, was amazingly sensual. He was getting an erection. “I wish I could have it again tonight.”

“Maybe you will,” he said, stroking her hair. “Maybe you will at that.”


FOUR

“My God, don’t you look good,” Ben said.

Against the hospital world of solid whites and anemic greens, Susan Norton looked very good indeed. She was wearing a bright yellow blouse with black vertical stripes and a short blue denim skirt.

“You, too,” she said, and crossed the room to him.

He kissed her deeply, and his hand slid to the warm curve of her hip and rubbed.

“Hey,” she said, breaking the kiss. “They kick you out for that.”

“Not me.”

“No, me.”

They looked at each other.

“I love you, Ben.”

“I love you, too.”

“If I could jump in with you right now—”

“Just a second, let me pull back the spread.”

“How would I explain it to those little candy-stripers?”

“Tell them you’re giving me the bedpan.”

She shook her head, smiling, and pulled up a chair. “A lot has happened in town, Ben.”

He sobered. “Like what?”

She hesitated. “I hardly know how to tell you, or what I believe myself. I’m mixed up, to say the least.”

“Well, spill it and let me sort it out.”

“What’s your condition, Ben?”

“Mending. Not serious. Matt’s doctor, a guy named Cody—”

“No. Your mind. How much of this Count Dracula stuff do you believe?”

“Oh. That. Matt told you everything?”

“Matt’s here in the hospital. One floor up in Intensive Care.”

“What?” He was up on his elbows. “What’s the matter with him?”

“Heart attack.”

“Heart attack!”

“Dr Cody says his condition is stable. He’s listed as serious, but that’s mandatory for the first forty-eight hours. I was there when it happened.”

“Tell me everything you remember, Susan.”

The pleasure had gone out of his face. It was watchful, intent, fine-drawn. Lost in the white room and the white sheets and the white hospital johnny, he again struck her as a man drawn to a taut, perhaps fraying edge.

“You didn’t answer my question, Ben.”

“About how I took Matt’s story?”

“Yes.”

“Let me answer you by saying what you think. You think the Marsten House has buggered my brain to the point where I’m seeing bats in my own belfry, to coin a phrase. Is that a fair estimate?”

“Yes, I suppose that’s it. But I never thought about it in such…such harsh terms.”

“I know that, Susan. Let me trace the progression of my thoughts for you, if I can. It may do me some good to sort them out. I can tell from your own face that something has knocked you back a couple of steps. Is that right?”

“Yes…but I don’t believe, can’t—”

“Stop a minute. That word can’t blocks up everything. That’s where I was stuck. That absolute, goddamned imperative word. Can’t. I didn’t believe Matt, Susan, because such things can’t be true. But I couldn’t find a hole in his story any way I looked at it. The most obvious conclusion was that he had jumped the tracks somewhere, right?”

“Yes.”

“Did he seem crazy to you?”

“No. No, but—”

“Stop.” He held up his hand. “You’re thinking can’t thoughts, aren’t you?”

“I suppose I am,” she said.

“He didn’t seem crazy or irrational to me, either. And we both know that paranoid fantasies or persecution complexes just don’t appear overnight. They grow over a period of time. They need careful watering, care, and feeding. Have you ever heard any talk in town about Matt having a screw loose? Ever heard Matt say that someone had the knife out for him? Has he ever been involved with any dubious causes—fluoridation causes brain cancer or Sons of the American Patriots or the NLF? Has he ever expressed an inordinate amount of interest in things such as séances or astral projection or reincarnation? Ever been arrested that you know of?”

“No,” she said. “No to everything. But Ben…it hurts me to say this about Matt, even to suggest it, but some people go crazy very quietly. They go crazy inside.”

“I don’t think so,” he said quietly. “There are signs. Sometimes you can’t read them before, but you can afterward. If you were on a jury, would you believe Matt’s testimony about a car crash?”

“Yes…”

“Would you believe him if he had told you he saw a prowler kill Mike Ryerson?”

“Yes, I guess I would.”

“But not this.”

“Ben, I just can’t—”

“There, you said it again.” He saw her ready to protest and held up a forestalling hand. “I’m not arguing his case, Susan. I’m only laying out my own train of thought. Okay?”

“Okay. Go on.”

“My second thought was that somebody set him up. Someone with bad blood, or a grudge.”

“Yes, that occurred to me.”

“Matt says he has no enemies. I believe him.”

“Everybody has enemies.”

“There are degrees. Don’t forget the most important thing—there’s a dead man wrapped up in this mess. If someone was out to get Matt, then someone must have murdered Mike Ryerson to do it.”

“Why?”

“Because the whole song and dance doesn’t make much sense without a body. And yet, according to Matt’s story, he met Mike purely by chance. No one led him to Dell’s last Thursday night. There was no anonymous call, no note, no nothing. The coincidence of the meeting was enough to rule out a setup.”

“What does that leave for rational explanations?”

“That Matt dreamed the sounds of the window going up, the laugh, and the sucking sounds. That Mike died of some natural but unknown causes.”

“You don’t believe that, either.”

“I don’t believe that he dreamed hearing the window go up. It was open. And the outside screen was lying on the lawn. I noticed it and Parkins Gillespie noticed it. And I noticed something else. Matt has latch-type screens on his house—they lock on the outside, not the inside. You can’t get them off from the inside unless you pry them off with a screwdriver or a paint scraper. Even then it would be tough. It would leave marks. I didn’t see any marks. And here’s another thing: The ground below that window was relatively soft. If you wanted to take off a second-floor screen, you’d need to use a ladder, and that would leave marks. There weren’t any. That’s what bothers me the most. A second-floor screen removed from the outside and no ladder marks beneath.”

They looked at each other somberly.

He resumed: “I was running this through my head this morning. The more I thought about it, the better Matt’s story looked. So I took a chance. I took the can’t away for a while. Now, tell me what happened at Matt’s last night. If it will knock all this into a cocked hat, no one is going to be happier than I.”

“It doesn’t,” she said unhappily. “It makes it worse. He had just finished telling me about Mike Ryerson. He said he heard someone upstairs. He was scared, but he went.” She folded her hands in her lap and was now holding them tightly, as if they might fly away. “Nothing else happened for a little while…and then Matt called out, something like he was revoking his invitation. Then…well, I don’t really know how to…”

“Go on. Don’t agonize over it.”

“I think someone—someone else—made a kind of hissing noise. There was a bump, as if something had fallen.” She looked at him bleakly. “And then I heard a voice say: I will see you sleep like the dead, teacher. That’s word for word. And when I went in later to get a blanket for Matt I found this.”

She took the ring out of her blouse pocket and dropped it into his hand.

Ben turned it over, then tilted it toward the window to let the light pick out the initials. “M.C.R. Mike Ryerson?”

“Mike Corey Ryerson. I dropped it and then made myself pick it up again—I thought you or Matt would want to see it. You keep it. I don’t want it back.”

“It makes you feel—?”

“Bad. Very bad.” She raised her head defiantly. “But all rational thought goes against this, Ben. I’d rather believe that Matt somehow murdered Mike Ryerson and invented that crazy vampire story for reasons of his own. Rigged the screen to fall off. Did a ventriloquist act in that guest room while I was downstairs, planted Mike’s ring—”

“And gave himself a heart attack to make it all seem more real,” Ben said dryly. “I haven’t given up hope of rational explanations, Susan. I’m hoping for one. Almost praying for one. Monsters in the movies are sort of fun, but the thought of them actually prowling through the night isn’t fun at all. I’ll even grant you that the screen could have been rigged—a simple rope sling anchored on the roof would do the trick. Let’s go further. Matt is something of a scholar. I suppose there are poisons that would cause the symptoms that Mike had—maybe undetectable poisons. Of course, the idea of poison is a little hard to believe because Mike ate so little—”

“You only have Matt’s word for that,” she pointed out.

“He wouldn’t lie, because he would know that an examination of the victim’s stomach is an important part of any autopsy. And a hypo would leave tracks. But for the sake of argument, let’s say it could be done. And a man like Matt could surely take something that would fake a heart attack. But where is the motive?”

She shook her head helplessly.

“Even granting some motive we don’t suspect, why would he go to such Byzantine lengths, or invent such a wild cover story? I suppose Ellery Queen could explain it somehow, but life isn’t an Ellery Queen plot.”

“But this…this other is lunacy, Ben.”

“Yes, like Hiroshima.”

“Will you stop doing that!” she whipcracked at him suddenly. “Don’t go playing the phony intellectual! It doesn’t fit you! We’re talking about wives’ tales, bad dreams, psychosis, anything you want to call it—”

“That’s shit,” he said. “Make connections. The world is coming down around our ears and you’re sticking at a few vampires.”

“’Salem’s Lot is my town,” she said stubbornly. “If something is happening there, it’s real. Not philosophy.”

“I couldn’t agree with you more,” he said, and touched the bandage on his head with a rueful finger. “And your ex packs a hell of a right.”

“I’m sorry. That’s a side of Floyd I never saw. I can’t understand it.”

“Where is he now?”

“In the town drunk tank. Parkins Gillespie told my mom he should turn him over to the county—to Sheriff McCaslin, that is—but he thought he’d wait and see if you wanted to prefer charges.”

“Do you have any feelings in the matter?”

“None whatever,” she said steadily. “He’s out of my life.”

“I’m not going to.”

She raised her eyebrows.

“But I want to talk to him.”

“About us?”

“About why he came at me wearing an overcoat, a hat, sunglasses…and Playtex rubber gloves.”

“What?”

“Well,” he said, looking at her, “the sun was out. It was shining on him. And I don’t think he liked that.”

They looked at each other wordlessly. There seemed to be nothing else on the subject to say.


FIVE

When Nolly brought Floyd his breakfast from the Excellent Café, Floyd was fast asleep. It seemed to Nolly that it would be a meanness to wake him up just to eat a couple of Pauline Dickens’s hard-fried eggs and five or six pieces of greasy bacon, so Nolly disposed of it himself in the office and drank the coffee, too. Pauline did make nice coffee—you could say that for her. But when he brought in Floyd’s lunch and Floyd was still sleeping and still in the same position, Nolly got a little scared and set the tray on the floor and went over and banged on the bars with a spoon.

“Hey! Floyd! Wake up, I got y’dinner.”

Floyd didn’t wake up, and Nolly took his key ring out of his pocket to open the drunk-tank door. He paused just before inserting the key. Last week’s Gunsmoke had been about a hard guy who pretended to be sick until he jumped the turnkey. Nolly had never thought of Floyd Tibbits as a particularly hard guy, but he hadn’t exactly rocked that Mears guy to sleep.

He paused indecisively, holding the spoon in one hand and the key ring in the other, a big man whose open-throat white shirts always sweat-stained around the armpits by noon of a warm day. He was a league bowler with an average of 151 and a weekend barhopper with a list of Portland red-light bars and motels in his wallet right behind his Lutheran Ministry pocket calendar. He was a friendly man, a natural fall guy, slow of reaction and also slow to anger. For all these not inconsiderable advantages, he was not particularly agile on his mental feet and for several minutes he stood wondering how to proceed, beating on the bars with the spoon, hailing Floyd, wishing he would move or snore or do something. He was just thinking he better call Parkins on the citizen’s band and get instructions when Parkins himself said from the office doorway:

“What in hell are you doin’, Nolly? Callin’ the hogs?”

Nolly blushed. “Floyd won’t move, Park. I’m afraid that maybe he’s…you know, sick.”

“Well, do you think beatin’ the bars with that goddamn spoon will make him better?” Parkins stepped by him and unlocked the cell.

“Floyd?” He shook Floyd’s shoulder. “Are you all r—”

Floyd fell off the chained bunk and onto the floor.

“Goddamn,” said Nolly. “He’s dead, ain’t he?”

But Parkins might not have heard. He was staring down at Floyd’s uncannily reposeful face. The fact slowly dawned on Nolly that Parkins looked as if someone had scared the bejesus out of him.

“What’s the matter, Park?”

“Nothin’,” Parkins said. “Just…let’s get out of here.” And then, almost to himself, he added: “Christ, I wish I hadn’t touched him.”

Nolly looked down at Floyd’s body with dawning horror.

“Wake up,” Parkins said. “We’ve got to get the doctor down here.”