Ann Norton drew the .38 from the pocket of her wrapper like some creaky gunslinger from beyond time. She pointed it at the duty nurse’s head and told her, “Turn around.”

The nurse’s mouth worked silently. She drew in breath with a convulsive heave.

“Don’t scream. I’ll kill you if you do.”

The air wheezed out. The nurse had gone very pale.

“Turn around now.”

The nurse got up slowly and turned around. Ann Norton reversed the .38 and prepared to bring the butt down on the nurse’s head with all the strength she had.

At that precise moment, her feet were kicked out from under her.


TWENTY-TWO

The gun went flying.

The woman in the ragged yellow dressing gown did not scream but began to make a high whining noise in her throat, almost keening. She scrambled after it like a crab, and the man who was behind her, looking bewildered and frightened, also darted after it. When he saw that she would get to it first, he kicked it across the lobby rug.

“Hey!” he yelled. “Hey, help!”

Ann Norton looked over her shoulder and hissed at him, her face pulled into a cheated scrawl of hate, and then scrambled after the gun again. The orderly had come back, on the run. He looked at the scene with blank amazement for a moment, and then picked up the gun that lay almost at his feet.

“For Christ’s sake,” he said. “This thing is load—”

She attacked him. Her hands, hooked into claws, pinwheeled across his face, dragging red stripes across the surprised orderly’s forehead and right cheek. He held the gun up out of her reach. Still keening, she clawed for it.

The bewildered man came up from behind and grabbed her. He would say later that it was like grabbing a bag of snakes. The body beneath the dressing gown was hot and repulsive, every muscle twitching and writhing.

As she struggled to get free, the orderly popped her one flush on the jaw. Her eyes rolled up to the whites and she collapsed.

The orderly and the bewildered man looked at each other.

The nurse at the reception desk was screaming. Her hands were clapped to her mouth, giving the screams a unique foghorn effect.

“What kind of a hospital do you people run here, anyhow?” the bewildered man asked.

“Christ if I know,” the orderly said. “What the hell happened?”

“I was just coming in to visit my sister. She had a baby. And this kid walks up to me and says a woman just went in with a gun. And—”

“What kid?”

The bewildered man who had come to visit his sister looked around. The lobby was filling with people, but all of them were above drinking age.

“I don’t see him now. But he was here. That gun loaded?”

“It sure is,” the orderly said.

“What kind of a hospital do you people run here, anyhow?” the bewildered man asked again.


TWENTY-THREE

They had seen two nurses run past the door toward the elevators and heard a vague shout down the stairwell. Ben glanced at Jimmy and Jimmy shrugged imperceptibly. Matt was dozing with his mouth open.

Ben closed the door and turned off the lights. Jimmy crouched by the foot of Matt’s bed, and when they heard footsteps hesitate outside the door, Ben stood beside it, ready. When it opened and a head poked through, he grabbed it in a half nelson and jammed the cross he held in the other hand into the face.

“Let me go!”

A hand reached up and beat futilely at his chest. A moment later the overhead light went on. Matt was sitting up in bed, blinking at Mark Petrie, who was struggling in Ben’s arms.

Jimmy came out of his crouch and ran across the room. He seemed almost ready to embrace the boy when he hesitated. “Lift your chin.”

Mark did, showing all three of them his unmarked neck.

Jimmy relaxed. “Boy, I’ve never been so glad to see anyone in my life. Where’s the Father?”

“Don’t know,” Mark said somberly. “Barlow caught me…killed my folks. They’re dead. My folks are dead. He beat their heads together. He killed my folks. Then he had me and he said to Father Callahan that he would let me go if Father Callahan would promise to throw away his cross. He promised. I ran. But before I ran, I spit on him. I spit on him and I’m going to kill him.”

He swayed in the doorway. There were bramble marks on his forehead and cheeks. He had run through the forest along the path where Danny Glick and his brother had come to grief so long before. His pants were wet to the knees from his flight through Taggart Stream. He had hitched a ride, but couldn’t remember who he had hitched it with. The radio had been playing, he remembered that.

Ben’s tongue was frozen. He did not know what to say.

“You poor boy,” Matt said softly. “You poor, brave boy.”

Mark’s face began to break up. His eyes closed and his mouth twisted and strained. “My muh-muh-mother—”

He staggered blindly and Ben caught him in his arms, enfolded him, rocked him as the tears came and raged against his shirt.


TWENTY-FOUR

Father Donald Callahan had no idea how long he walked in the dark. He stumbled back toward the downtown area along Jointner Avenue, never heeding his car, which he had left parked in the Petries’ driveway. Sometimes he wandered in the middle of the road, and sometimes he staggered along the sidewalk. Once a car bore down on him, its headlights great shining circles; its horn began to blare and it swerved at the last instant, tires screaming on the pavement. Once he fell in the ditch. As he approached the yellow blinking light, it began to rain.

There was no one on the streets to mark his passage; ’salem’s Lot had battened down for the night, even tighter than usual. The diner was empty, and in Spencer’s Miss Coogan was sitting by her cash register and reading a confession magazine off the rack in the frosty glow of the overhead fluorescents. Outside, under the lighted sign showing the blue dog in mid-flight, a red neon sign said:



BUS



They were afraid, he supposed. They had every reason to be. Some inner part of themselves had absorbed the danger, and tonight doors were locked in the Lot that had not been locked in years…if ever.

He was on the streets alone. And he alone had nothing to fear. It was funny. He laughed aloud, and the sound of it was like wild, lunatic sobbing. No vampire would touch him. Others, perhaps, but not him. The Master had marked him, and he would walk free until the Master claimed his own.

St Andrew’s loomed above him.

He hesitated, then walked up the path. He would pray. Pray all night, if necessary. Not to the new God, the God of ghettos and social conscience and free lunches, but the old God, who had proclaimed through Moses not to suffer a witch to live and who had given it unto his own son to raise from the dead. A second chance, God. All my life for penance. Only…a second chance.

He stumbled up the wide steps, his gown muddy and bedraggled, his mouth smeared with Barlow’s blood.

At the top he paused a moment, and then reached for the handle of the middle door.

As he touched it, there was a blue flash of light and he was thrown backward. Pain lanced his back, then his head, then his chest and stomach and shins as he fell head over heels down the granite steps to the walk.

He lay trembling in the rain, his hand afire.

He lifted it before his eyes. It was burned.

“Unclean,” he muttered. “Unclean, unclean, O God, so unclean.”

He began to shiver. He slid his arms around his shoulders and shivered in the rain and the church loomed behind him, its doors shut against him.


TWENTY-FIVE

Mark Petrie sat on Matt’s bed, in exactly the spot Ben had occupied when Ben and Jimmy had come in. Mark had dried his tears with his shirtsleeve, and although his eyes were puffy and bloodshot, he seemed to have himself in control.

“You know, don’t you,” Matt asked him, “that ’salem’s Lot is in a desperate situation?”

Mark nodded.

“Even now, his Undead are crawling over it,” Matt said somberly. “Taking others to themselves. They won’t get them all—not tonight—but there is dreadful work ahead of you tomorrow.”

“Matt, I want you to get some sleep,” Jimmy said. “We’ll be here, don’t worry. You don’t look good. This has been a horrible strain on you—”

“My town is disintegrating almost before my eyes and you want me to sleep?” His eyes, seemingly tireless, flashed out of his haggard face.

Jimmy said stubbornly, “If you want to be around for the finish, you better save something back. I’m telling you that as your physician, goddammit.”

“All right. In a minute.” He looked at all of them. “Tomorrow the three of you must go back to Mark’s house. You’re going to make stakes. A great many of them.”

The meaning sank home to them.

“How many?” Ben asked softly.

“I would say you’ll need three hundred at least. I advise you to make five hundred.”

“That’s impossible,” Jimmy said flatly. “There can’t be that many of them.”

“The Undead are thirsty,” Matt said simply. “It’s best to be prepared. You will go together. You dare not split up, even in the daytime. It will be like a scavenger hunt. You must start at one end of town and work toward the other.”

“We’ll never be able to find them all,” Ben objected. “Not even if we could start at first light and work through until dark.”

“You’ve got to do your best, Ben. People may begin to believe you. Some will help, if you show them the truth of what you say. And when dark comes again, much of his work will be undone.” He sighed. “We have to assume that Father Callahan is lost to us. That’s bad. But you must press on, regardless. You’ll have to be careful, all of you. Be ready to lie. If you’re locked up, that will serve his purpose well. And if you haven’t considered it, you might do well to consider it now: There is every possibility that some of us or all of us may live and triumph only to stand trial for murder.”

He looked each of them in the face. What he saw there must have satisfied him, because he turned his attention wholly to Mark again.

“You know what the most important job is, don’t you?”

“Yes,” Mark said. “Barlow has to be killed.”

Matt smiled a trifle thinly. “That’s putting the cart before the horse, I’m afraid. First we have to find him.” He looked closely at Mark. “Did you see anything tonight, hear anything, smell anything, touch anything, that might help us locate him? Think carefully before you answer! You know better than any of us how important it is!”

Mark thought. Ben had never seen anyone take a command quite so literally. He lowered his chin into the palm of his hand and shut his eyes. He seemed to be quite deliberately going over every nuance of the night’s encounter.

At last he opened his eyes, looked around at them briefly, and shook his head. “Nothing.”

Matt’s face fell, but he did not give up. “A leaf clinging to his coat, maybe? A cattail in his pants cuff? Dirt on his shoes? Any loose thread that he has allowed to dangle?” He smote the bed helplessly. “Jesus Christ Almighty, is he seamless like an egg?”

Mark’s eyes suddenly widened.

“What?” Matt said. He grasped the boy’s elbow. “What is it? What have you thought of?”

“Blue chalk,” Mark said. “He had one arm hooked around my neck, like this, and I could see his hand. He had long white fingers and there were smears of blue chalk on two of them. Just little ones.”

“Blue chalk,” Matt said thoughtfully.

“A school,” Ben said. “It must be.”

“Not the high school,” Matt said. “All our supplies come from Dennison and Company in Portland. They supply only white and yellow. I’ve had it under my fingernails and on my coats for years.”

“Art classes?” Ben asked.

“No, only graphic arts at the high school. They use inks, not chalk. Mark, are you sure it was—”

“Chalk,” he said, nodding.

“I believe some of the science teachers use colored chalk, but where is there to hide at the high school? You saw it—all on one level, all enclosed in glass. People are in and out of the supply closets all day. That is also true of the furnace room.”

“Backstage?”

Matt shrugged. “It’s dark enough. But if Mrs Rodin takes over the class play for me—the students call her Mrs Rodan after a quaint Japanese science fiction film—that area would be used a great deal. It would be a horrible risk for him.”

“What about the grammar schools?” Jimmy asked. “They must teach drawing in the lower grades. And I’d bet a hundred dollars that colored chalk is one of the things they keep on hand.”

Matt said, “The Stanley Street Elementary School was built with the same bond money as the high school. It is also modernistic, filled to capacity, and built on one level. Many glass windows to let in the sun. Not the kind of building our target would want to frequent at all. They like old buildings, full of tradition, dark, dingy, like—”

“Like the Brock Street School,” Mark said.

“Yes.” Matt looked at Ben. “The Brock Street School is a wooden frame building, three stories and a basement, built at about the same time as the Marsten House. There was much talk in the town when the school bond issue was up for a vote that the school was a fire hazard. It was one reason our bond issue passed. There had been a schoolhouse fire in New Hampshire two or three years before—”

“I remember,” Jimmy murmured. “In Cobbs’ Ferry, wasn’t it?”

“Yes. Three children were burned to death.”

“Is the Brock Street School still used?” Ben asked.

“Only the first floor. Grades one through four. The entire building is due to be phased out in two years, when they put the addition on the Stanley Street School.”

“Is there a place for Barlow to hide?”

“I suppose so,” Matt said, but he sounded reluctant. “The second and third floors are full of empty classrooms. The windows have been boarded over because so many children threw stones through them.”

“That’s it, then,” Ben said. “It must be.”

“It sounds good,” Matt admitted, and he looked very tired indeed now. “But it seems too simple. Too transparent.”

“Blue chalk,” Jimmy murmured. His eyes were far away.

“I don’t know,” Matt said, sounding distracted. “I just don’t know.”

Jimmy opened his black bag and brought out a small bottle of pills. “Two of these with water,” he said. “Right now.”

“No. There’s too much to go over. There’s too much—”

“Too much for us to risk losing you,” Ben said firmly. “If Father Callahan is gone, you’re the most important of all of us now. Do as he says.”

Mark brought a glass of water from the bathroom, and Matt gave in with some bad grace.

It was quarter after ten.

Silence fell in the room. Ben thought that Matt looked fearfully old, fearfully used. His white hair seemed thinner, drier, and a lifetime of care seemed to have stamped itself on his face in a matter of days. In a way, Ben thought, it was fitting that when trouble finally came to him—great trouble—it should come in this dreamlike, darkly fantastical form. A lifetime’s existence had prepared him to deal in symbolic evils that sprang to light under the reading lamp and disappeared at dawn.

“I’m worried about him,” Jimmy said softly.

“I thought the attack was mild,” Ben said. “Not really a heart attack at all.”

“It was a mild occlusion. But the next one won’t be mild. It’ll be major. This business is going to kill him if it doesn’t end quickly.” He took Matt’s hand and fingered the pulse gently, with love. “That,” he said, “would be a tragedy.”

They waited around his bedside, sleeping and watching by turns. He slept the night away, and Barlow did not put in an appearance. He had business elsewhere.


TWENTY-SIX

Miss Coogan was reading a story called “I Tried to Strangle Our Baby” in Real Life Confessions when the door opened and her first customer of the evening came in.

She had never seen things so slow. Ruthie Crockett and her friends hadn’t even been in for a soda at the fountain—not that she missed that crowd—and Loretta Starcher hadn’t stopped in for The New York Times. It was still under the counter, neatly folded. Loretta was the only person in Jerusalem’s Lot who bought the Times (she pronounced it that way, in italics) regularly. And the next day she would put it out in the reading room.

Mr Labree hadn’t come back from his supper, either, although there was nothing unusual about that. Mr Labree was a widower with a big house out on Schoolyard Hill near the Griffens, and Miss Coogan knew perfectly well that he didn’t go home for his supper. He went out to Dell’s and ate hamburgers and drank beer. If he wasn’t back by eleven (and it was quarter of now), she would get the key out of the cash drawer and lock up herself. Wouldn’t be the first time, either. But they would all be in a pretty pickle if someone came in needing medicine badly.

She sometimes missed the after-movie rush that had always come about this time before they had demolished the old Nordica across the street—people wanting ice-cream sodas and frappés and malteds, dates holding hands and talking about homework assignments. It had been hard, but it had been wholesome, too. Those children hadn’t been like Ruthie Crockett and her crowd, sniggering and flaunting their busts and wearing jeans tight enough to show the line of their panties—if they were wearing any. The reality of her feelings for those bygone patrons (who, although she had forgotten it, had irritated her just as much) was fogged by nostalgia, and she looked up eagerly when the door opened, as if it might be a member of the class of ’64 and his girl, ready for a chocolate fudge sundae with extra nuts.

But it was a man, a grown-up man, someone she knew but could not place. As he carried his suitcase down to the counter, something in his walk or the motion of his head identified him for her.

“Father Callahan!” she said, unable to keep the surprise out of her voice. She had never seen him without his priest suit on. He was wearing plain dark slacks and a blue chambray shirt, like a common mill-worker.

She was suddenly frightened. The clothes he wore were clean and his hair was neatly combed, but there was something in his face, something—

She suddenly remembered the day, twenty years ago, when she had come from the hospital where her mother had died of a sudden stroke—what the old-timers called a shock. When she had told her brother, he had looked something like Father Callahan did now. His face had a haggard, doomed look, and his eyes were blank and stunned. There was a burned-out look in them that made her uncomfortable. And the skin around his mouth looked red and irritated, as if he had overshaved or rubbed it for a long period of time with a washcloth, trying to get rid of a bad stain.

“I want to buy a bus ticket,” he said.

That’s it, she thought. Poor man, someone’s died and he just got the call down at the directory, or whatever they call it.

“Certainly,” she said. “Where—”

“What’s the first bus?”

“To where?”

“Anywhere,” he said, throwing her theory into shambles.

“Well…I don’t…let me see…” She fumbled out the schedule, and looked at it, flustered. “There’s a bus at eleven-ten that connects with Portland, Boston, Hartford, and New Y—”

“That one,” he said. “How much?”

“For how long—I mean, how far?” She was thoroughly flustered now.

“All the way,” he said hollowly, and smiled. She had never seen such a dreadful smile on a human face, and she flinched from it. If he touches me, she thought, I’ll scream. Scream blue murder.

“T-th-that would be to New York City,” she said. “Twenty-nine dollars and seventy-five cents.”

He dug his wallet out of his back pocket with some difficulty, and she saw that his right hand was bandaged. He put a twenty and two ones before her, and she knocked a whole pile of blank tickets onto the floor taking one off the top of the stack. When she finished picking them up, he had added five more ones and a pile of change.

She wrote the ticket as fast as she could, but nothing would have been fast enough. She could feel his dead gaze on her. She stamped it and pushed it across the counter so she wouldn’t have to touch his hand.

“Y-you’ll have to wait outside, Father C-Callahan. I’ve got to close in about five minutes.” She scraped the bills and change into the cash drawer blindly, making no attempt to count it.

“That’s fine,” he said. He stuffed the ticket into his breast pocket. Without looking at her he said, “And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, that whosoever found him should not kill him. And Cain went out from the face of the Lord, and dwelt as a fugitive on the earth, at the east side of Eden. That’s Scripture, Miss Coogan. The hardest scripture in the Bible.”

“Is that so?” she said. “I’m afraid you’ll have to go outside, Father Callahan. I…Mr Labree is just in back a minute and he doesn’t like…doesn’t like me to…to…”

“Of course,” he said, and turned to go. He stopped and looked around at her. She flinched before those wooden eyes. “You live in Falmouth, don’t you, Miss Coogan?”

“Yes—”

“Have your own car?”

“Yes, of course. I really have to ask you to wait for the bus outside—”

“Drive home quickly tonight, Miss Coogan. Lock all your car doors and don’t stop for anybody. Anybody. Don’t even stop if it’s someone you know.”

“I never pick up hitchhikers,” Miss Coogan said righteously.

“And when you get home, stay away from Jerusalem’s Lot,” Callahan went on. He was looking at her fixedly. “Things have gone bad in the Lot now.”

She said faintly, “I don’t know what you’re talking about, but you’ll have to wait for the bus outside.”

“Yes. All right.”

He went out.

She became suddenly aware of how quiet the drugstore was, how utterly quiet. Could it be that no one—no one—had come in since it got dark except Father Callahan? It was. No one at all.

Things have gone bad in the Lot now.

She began to go around and turn off the lights.


TWENTY-SEVEN

In the Lot the dark held hard.

At ten minutes to twelve, Charlie Rhodes was awakened by a long, steady honking. He came awake in his bed and sat bolt upright.

His bus!

And on the heels of that:

The little bastards!

The children had tried things like this before. He knew them, the miserable little sneaks. They had let the air out of his tires with matchsticks once. He hadn’t seen who did it, but he had a damned good idea. He had gone to that damned wet-ass principal and reported Mike Philbrook and Audie James. He had known it was them—who had to see?

Are you sure it was them, Rhodes?

I told you, didn’t I?

And there was nothing that fucking mollycoddle could do; he had to suspend them. Then the bastard had called him to the office a week later.

Rhodes, we suspended Andy Garvey today.

Yeah? Not surprised. What was he up to?

Bob Thomas caught him letting the air out of his bus tires. And he had given Charlie Rhodes a long, cold, measuring look.

Well, so what if it had been Garvey instead of Philbrook and James? They all hung around together, they were all creeps, they all deserved to have their nuts in the grinder.

Now, from outside, the maddening sound of his horn, running down the battery, really laying on it:

Whonk, whonnk, whoonnnnnnnnk—

“You sons of whores,” he whispered, and slid out of bed. He dragged his pants on without using the light. The light would scare the little scumbags away, and he didn’t want that.

Another time, someone had left a cow pie on his driver’s seat, and he had a pretty good idea of who had done that, too. You could read it in their eyes. He had learned that standing guard at the repple depple in the war. He had taken care of the cow-pie business in his own way. Kicked the little son of a whore off the bus three days’ running, four miles from home. The kid finally came to him crying.

I ain’t done nothin’, Mr Rhodes. Why you keep kickin’ me off?

You call puttin’ a cow flop on my seat nothin’?

No, that wasn’t me. Honest to God it wasn’t.

Well, you had to hand it to them. They could lie to their own mothers with a clear and smiling face, and they probably did it, too. He had kicked the kid off two more nights and then he had confessed, by the Jesus. Charlie kicked him off once more—one to grow on, you might say—and then Dave Felsen down at the motor pool told him he better cool it for a while.

Whonnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnk—

He grabbed his shirt and then got the old tennis racket standing in the corner. By Christ, he was going to whip some ass tonight!

He went out the back door and around the house to where he kept the big yellow bus parked. He felt tough and coldly competent. This was infiltration, just like the Army.

He paused behind the oleander bush and looked at the bus. Yes, he could see them, a whole bunch of them, darker shapes behind the night-darkened glass. He felt the old red rage, the hate of them like hot ice, and his grip on the tennis racket tightened until it trembled in his hand like a tuning fork. They had busted out—six, seven, eight—eight windows on his bus!

He slipped behind it and then crept up the long yellow side to the passenger door. It was folded open. He tensed, and suddenly sprang up the steps.

“All right! Stay where you are! Kid, lay off that goddamn horn or I’ll—”

The kid sitting in the driver’s seat with both hands plastered on the horn ring turned to him and smiled crazily. Charlie felt a sickening drop in his gut. It was Richie Boddin. He was white—just as white as a sheet—except for the black chips of coal that were his eyes, and his lips, which were ruby red.

And his teeth—

Charlie Rhodes looked down the aisle.

Was that Mike Philbrook? Audie James? God Almighty, the Griffen boys were down there! Hal and Jack, sitting near the back with hay in their hair. But they don’t ride on my bus! Mary Kate Griegson and Brent Tenney, sitting side by side. She was in a nightgown, he in blue jeans and a flannel shirt that was on backward and inside out, as if he had forgotten how to dress himself.

And Danny Glick. But—oh, Christ—he was dead; dead for weeks!

“You,” he said through numb lips. “You kids—”

The tennis racket slid from his hand. There was a wheeze and a thump as Richie Boddin, still smiling that crazy smile, worked the chrome lever that shut the folding door. They were getting out of their seats now, all of them.

“No,” he said, trying to smile. “You kids…you don’t understand. It’s me. It’s Charlie Rhodes. You…you…” He grinned at them without meaning, shook his head, held out his hands to show them they were just ole Charlie Rhodes’s hands, blameless, and backed up until his back was jammed against the wide tinted glass of the windshield.

“Don’t,” he whispered.

They came on, grinning. “Please don’t.”

And fell on him.


TWENTY-EIGHT

Ann Norton died on the short elevator trip from the first floor of the hospital to the second. She shivered once, and a small trickle of blood ran from the corner of her mouth.

“Okay,” one of the orderlies said. “You can turn off the siren now.”


TWENTY-NINE

Eva Miller had been dreaming.

It was a strange dream, not quite a nightmare. The fire of ’51 was raging under an unforgiving sky that shaded from pale blue at the horizons to a hot and merciless white overhead. The sun glared from this inverted bowl like a glinting copper coin. The acrid smell of smoke was everywhere; all business activity had stopped and people stood in the streets, looking southwest, toward the Marshes, and northwest, toward the woods. The smoke had been in the air all morning, but now, at one in the afternoon, you could see the bright arteries of fire dancing in the green beyond Griffen’s pasture. The steady breeze that had allowed the flames to jump one firebreak now brought a steady fall of white ash over the town like summer snow.

Ralph was alive, off trying to save the sawmill. But it was all mixed up because Ed Craig was with her and she had never even met Ed until the fall of 1954.

She was watching the fire from her upstairs bedroom window, and she was naked. Hands touched her from behind, rough brown hands on the smooth whiteness of her hips, and she knew it was Ed, although she could not see even a ghost of his reflection in the glass.

Ed, she tried to say. Not now. It’s too early. Not for almost nine years.

But his hands were insistent, running over her belly, one finger toying with the cup of her navel, then both hands slipping up to catch her breasts with brazen knowledge.

She tried to tell him they were in the window, anyone out there in the street could look over his shoulder and see them, but the words would not come out and then his lips were on her arm, her shoulder, then fastening with firm and lustful insistence on her neck. She felt his teeth and he was biting her, sucking and biting, drawing blood, and she tried to protest again: Don’t give me a hickey, Ralph will see—

But it was impossible to protest and she no longer even wanted to. She no longer cared who looked around and saw them, naked and brazen.

Her eyes drifted dreamily to the fire as his lips and teeth worked against her neck, and the smoke was very black, as black as night, obscuring that hot gunmetal sky, turning day to night; yet the fire moved inside it in those pulsing scarlet threads and blossoms—rioting flowers in a midnight jungle.

And then it was night and the town was gone but the fire still raged in the blackness, shifting through fascinating, kaleidoscopic shapes until it seemed that it limned a face in blood—a face with a hawk nose, deep-set, fiery eyes, full and sensuous lips partially hidden by a heavy mustache, and hair swept back from the brow like a musician’s.

“The Welsh dresser,” a voice said distantly, and she knew it was his. “The one in the attic. That will do nicely, I think. And then we’ll fix the stairs…it’s wise to be prepared.”

The voice faded. The flames faded.

There was only the darkness, and she in it, dreaming or beginning to dream. She thought dimly that the dream would be sweet and long, but bitter underneath and without light, like the waters of Lethe.

Another voice—Ed’s voice. “Come on, darlin’. Get up. We have to do as he says.”

“Ed? Ed?”

His face looked over hers, not drawn in fire, but looking terribly pale and strangely empty. Yet she loved him again…more than ever. She yearned for his kiss.

“Come on, Eva.”

“Is it a dream, Ed?”

“No…not a dream.”

For a moment she was frightened, and then there was no more fear. There was knowing instead. With the knowing came the hunger.

She glanced into the mirror and saw only her bedroom reflected, empty and still. The attic door was locked and the key was in the bottom drawer of the dresser, but it didn’t matter. No need for keys now.

They slipped between the door and the jamb like shades.





THIRTY

At three in the morning the blood runs slow and thick, and slumber is heavy. The soul either sleeps in blessed ignorance of such an hour or gazes about itself in utter despair. There is no middle ground. At three in the morning the gaudy paint is off that old whore, the world, and she has no nose and a glass eye. Gaiety becomes hollow and brittle, as in Poe’s castle surrounded by the Red Death. Horror is destroyed by boredom. Love is a dream.

Parkins Gillespie shambled from his office desk to the coffeepot, looking like a very thin ape that had been sick with a wasting illness. Behind him, a game of solitaire was laid out like a clock. He had heard several screams in the night, the strange, jagged beating of a horn on the air, and once, running feet. He had not gone out to investigate any of these things. His lined and socketed face was haunted by the things he thought were going on out there. He was wearing a cross, a St Christopher’s medal, and a peace sign around his neck. He didn’t know exactly why he had put them on, but they comforted him. He was thinking that if he could get through this night, he would go far away tomorrow and leave his badge on the shelf, by his key ring.

Mabel Werts was sitting at her kitchen table, a cold cup of coffee in front of her, the shades pulled down for the first time in years, the lens caps on her binoculars. For the first time in sixty years she did not want to see things, or hear them. The night was rife with a deadly gossip she did not want to listen to.

Bill Norton was on his way to the Cumberland Hospital in response to a telephone call (made while his wife was still alive), and his face was wooden and unmoving. The windshield wipers clicked steadily against the rain, which was coming down more heavily now. He was trying not to think about anything.

There were others in the town who were either sleeping or waking untouched. Most of the untouched were single people without relatives or close friends in the town. Many of them were unaware that anything had been happening.

Those that were awake, however, had turned on all their lights, and a person driving through town (and several cars did pass, headed for Portland or points south) might have been struck by this small village, so much like the others along the way, with its odd salting of fully lit dwellings in the very graveyard of morning. The passerby might have slowed to look for a fire or an accident, and seeing neither, speeded up and dismissed it from mind.

Here is the peculiar thing: None of those awake in Jerusalem’s Lot knew the truth. A handful might have suspected, but even their suspicions were as vague and unformed as three-month fetuses. Yet they had gone unhesitatingly to bureau drawers, attic boxes, or bedroom jewel collections to find whatever religious hex symbols they might possess. They did this without thinking, the way a man driving a long distance alone will sing without knowing he sings. They walked slowly from room to room, as if their bodies had become glassy and fragile, and they turned on all the lights, and they did not look out their windows.

That above all else. They did not look out their windows.

No matter what noises or dreadful possibilities, no matter how awful the unknown, there was an even worse thing: to look the Gorgon in the face.


THIRTY-ONE

The noise penetrated his sleep like a nail being bludgeoned into heavy oak; with exquisite slowness, seemingly fiber by fiber. At first Reggie Sawyer thought he was dreaming of carpentry, and his brain, in the shadow land between sleeping and waking, obliged with a slow-motion memory fragment of him and his father nailing clapboards to the sides of the camp they had built on Bryant Pond in 1960.

This faded into a muddled idea that he was not dreaming at all, but actually hearing a hammer at work. Disorientation followed, and then he was awake and the blows were falling on the front door, someone dropping his fist against the wood with metronomelike regularity.

His eyes first jerked to Bonnie, who was lying on her side, an S-shaped hump under the blankets. Then to the clock: 4:15.

He got up, slipped out of the bedroom, and closed the door behind him. He turned on the hall light, started down toward the door, and then paused. An internal set of hackles had risen.

Sawyer regarded his front door with mute, head-cocked curiosity. No one knocked at 4:15. If someone in the family croaked, they called on the telephone, but they didn’t come knocking.

He had been in Vietnam for seven months in 1968, a very hard year for American boys in Vietnam, and he had seen combat. In those days, coming awake had been as sudden as the snapping of fingers or the clicking on of a lamp; one minute you were a stone, the next you were awake in the dark. The habit had died in him almost as soon as he had been shipped back to the States, and he had been proud of that, although he never spoke of it. He was no machine, by Jesus. Push button A and Johnny wakes up, push button B and Johnny kills some slants.

But now, with no warning at all, the muzziness and cottonheadedness of sleep fell off him like a snakeskin and he was cold and blinking.

Someone was out there. The Bryant kid, likely, liquored up and packing iron. Ready to do or die for the fair maiden.

He went into the living room and crossed to the gunrack over the fake fireplace. He didn’t turn on a light; he knew his way around by touch perfectly well. He took down his shotgun, broke it, and the hall light gleamed dully on brass casings. He went back to the living room doorway and poked his head out into the hall. The pounding went on monotonously, with regularity but no rhythm.

“Come on in,” Reggie Sawyer called.

The pounding stopped.

There was a long pause and then the doorknob turned, very slowly, until it had reached full cock. The door opened and Corey Bryant stood there.

Reggie felt his heart falter for an instant. Bryant was dressed in the same clothes he had been wearing when Reggie sent him down the road, only now they were ripped and mud-stained. Leaves clung to his pants and shirt. A streak of dirt across his forehead accentuated his pallor.

“Stop right there,” Reggie said, lifting the shotgun and clicking off the safety. “This time it’s loaded.”

But Corey Bryant plodded forward, his dull eyes fixed on Reggie’s face with an expression that was worse than hate. His tongue slid out and slicked his lips. His shoes were clotted with heavy mud that had been mixed to a black glue by the rain, and clods dropped off onto the hall floor as he came forward. There was something unforgiving and remorseless in that walk, something that impressed the watching eye with a cold and dreadful lack of mercy. The mud-caked heels clumped. There was no command that would stop them or plea that would stay them.

“Take two more steps and I’ll blow your fucking head off,” Reggie said. The words came out hard and dry. The guy was worse than drunk. He was off his rocker. He knew with sudden clarity that he was going to have to shoot him.

“Stop,” he said again, but in a casual, offhand way.

Corey Bryant did not stop. His eyes were fixed on Reggie’s face with the dead and sparkling avidity of a stuffed moose. His heels clumped solemnly on the floor.

Bonnie screamed behind him.

“Go on in the bedroom,” Reggie said. He stepped out into the hallway to get between them. Bryant was only two paces away now. One limp, white hand was reaching out to grasp the twin barrels of the Stevens.

Reggie pulled both triggers.

The blast was like a thunderclap in the narrow hallway. Fire licked momentarily from both barrels. The stink of burned powder filled the air. Bonnie screamed again, piercingly. Corey’s shirt shredded and blackened and parted, not so much perforated as disintegrated. Yet when it blew open, divorced from its buttons, the fish whiteness of his chest and abdomen was incredibly unmarked. Reggie’s frozen eyes received an impression that the flesh was not really flesh at all, but something as insubstantial as a gauze curtain.

Then the shotgun was slapped from his hands, as if from the hands of a child. He was gripped and thrown against the wall with teeth-rattling force. His legs refused to support him and he fell down, dazed. Bryant walked past him, toward Bonnie. She was cringing in the doorway, but her eyes were on his face, and Reggie could see the heat in them.

Corey looked back over his shoulder and grinned at Reggie, a huge and moony grin, like that offered to tourists by cow skulls in the desert. Bonnie was holding her arms out. They trembled. Over her face, terror and lust seemed to pass like alternating flashes of sunshine and shadow.

“Darling,” she said.

Reggie screamed.


THIRTY-TWO

“Hey,” the bus driver said. “This is Hartford, Mac.”

Callahan looked out the wide, polarized window at the strange country, made even stranger by the first seeping light of morning. In the Lot they would be going back now, back into their holes.

“I know,” he said.

“We got a twenty-minute rest stop. Don’t you want to go in and get a sandwich or something?”

Callahan fumbled his wallet out of his pocket with his bandaged hand and almost dropped it. Oddly, the burned hand didn’t seem to hurt much anymore; it was only numb. It would have been better if there had been pain. Pain was at least real. The taste of death was in his mouth, a moronic, mealy taste like a spoiled apple. Was that all? Yes. That was bad enough.

He held out a twenty. “Can you get me a bottle?”

“Mister, the rules—”

“And keep the change, of course. A pint would be fine.”

“I don’t need nobody cutting up on my bus, mister. We’ll be in New York in two hours. You can get what you want there. Anything.”

I think you are wrong, friend, Callahan thought. He looked into the wallet again to see what was there. A ten, two fives, a single. He added the ten to the twenty and held it out in his bandaged hand.

“A pint would be fine,” he said. “And keep the change, of course.”

The driver looked from the thirty dollars to the dark, socketed eyes, and for one terrible moment thought he was holding conversation with a living skull, a skull that had somehow forgotten how to grin.

“Thirty dollars for a pint? Mister, you’re crazy.” But he took the money, walked to the front of the empty bus, then turned back. The money had disappeared. “But don’t you go cutting up on me. I don’t need nobody cutting up on my bus.”

Callahan nodded like a very small boy accepting a deserved reprimand.

The bus driver looked at him a moment longer, then got off.

Something cheap, Callahan thought. Something that will burn the tongue and sizzle the throat. Something to take away that bland, sweet taste…or at least allay it until he could find a place to begin drinking in earnest. To drink and drink and drink—

He thought then that he might break down, begin to cry. There were no tears. He felt very dry, and completely empty. There was only…that taste.

Hurry, driver.

He went on looking out the window. Across the street, a teenaged boy was sitting on a porch stoop with his head folded into his arms. Callahan watched him until the bus pulled out again, but the boy never moved.


THIRTY-THREE

Ben felt a hand on his arm and swam upward to wakefulness. Mark, near his right ear, said, “Morning.”

He opened his eyes, blinked twice to clear the gum out of them, and looked out the window at the world. Dawn had come stealing through a steady autumn rain that was neither heavy nor light. The trees which ringed the grassy pavilion on the hospital’s north side were half denuded now, and the black branches were limned against the gray sky like giant letters in an unknown alphabet. Route 30, which curved out of town to the east, was as shiny as sealskin—a car passing with its taillights still on left baleful red reflections on the macadam.

Ben stood up and looked around. Matt was sleeping, his chest rising and falling in regular but shallow respiration. Jimmy was also asleep, stretched out in the room’s one lounge chair. There was an undoctor-like stubble on the planes of his cheeks, and Ben ran a palm across his own face. It rasped.

“Time to get going, isn’t it?” Mark asked.

Ben nodded. He thought of the day ahead of them and all its potential hideousness, and shied away from it. The only way to get through it would be without thinking more than ten minutes ahead. He looked into the boy’s face, and the stony eagerness he saw there made him feel queasy. He went over and shook Jimmy.

“Huh!” Jimmy said. He thrashed in his chair like a swimmer coming up from deep water. His face twitched, his eyes fluttered open, and for a moment they showed blank terror. He looked at them both unreasoningly, without recognition.

Then recognition came, and his body relaxed. “Oh. Dream.”

Mark nodded in perfect understanding.

Jimmy looked out the window and said “Daylight” the way a miser might say money. He got up and went over to Matt, took his wrist and held it.

“Is he all right?” Mark asked.

“I think he’s better than he was last night,” Jimmy said. “Ben, I want the three of us to leave by way of the service elevator in case someone noticed Mark last night. The less risk, the better.”

“Will Mr Burke be okay alone?” Mark asked.

“I think so,” Ben said. “We’ll have to trust to his ingenuity, I guess. Barlow would like nothing better than to have us tied up another day.”

They tiptoed down the corridor and used the service elevator. The kitchen was just cranking up at this hour—almost quarter past seven. One of the cooks looked up, waved a hand, and said, “Hi, Doc.” No one else spoke to them.

“Where first?” Jimmy asked. “The Brock Street School?”

“No,” Ben said. “Too many people until this afternoon. Do the little ones get out early, Mark?”

“They go until two o’clock.”

“That leaves plenty of daylight,” Ben said. “Mark’s house first. Stakes.”


THIRTY-FOUR

As they drew closer to the Lot, an almost palpable cloud of dread formed in Jimmy’s Buick, and conversation lagged. When Jimmy pulled off the turnpike at the large green reflectorized sign that read route 12 jerusalem’s lot cumberland cumberland ctr, Ben thought that this was the way he and Susan had come home after their first date—she had wanted to see something with a car chase in it.

“It’s gone bad,” Jimmy said. His boyish face looked pale and frightened and angry. “Christ, you can almost smell it.”

And you could, Ben thought, although the smell was mental rather than physical: a psychic whiff of tombs.

Route 12 was nearly deserted. On the way in they passed Win Purinton’s milk truck, parked off the road and deserted. The motor was idling, and Ben turned it off after looking in the back. Jimmy glanced at him inquiringly as he got back in. Ben shook his head. “He’s not there. The engine light was on, and it was almost out of gas. Been idling there for hours.” Jimmy pounded his leg with a closed fist.

But as they entered town, Jimmy said in an almost absurdly relieved tone, “Look there. Crossen’s is open.”

It was. Milt was out front, fussing a plastic drop cover over his rack of newspapers, and Lester Silvius was standing next to him, dressed in a yellow slicker.

“Don’t see the rest of the crew, though,” Ben said.

Milt glanced up at them and waved, and Ben thought he saw lines of strain on both men’s faces. The “Closed” sign was still posted inside the door of Foreman’s Mortuary. The hardware store was also closed, and Spencer’s was locked and dark. The diner was open, and after they had passed it, Jimmy pulled his Buick up to the curb in front of the new shop. Above the show window, simple gold-faced letters spelled out the name: “Barlow and Straker—Fine Furnishings.” And taped to the door, as Callahan had said, a sign which had been hand-lettered in a fine script which they all recognized from the note they had seen the day before: “Closed until further notice.”

“Why are you stopping here?” Mark asked.

“Just on the off-chance that he might be holing up inside,” Jimmy said. “It’s so obvious he might figure we’d overlook it. And I think that sometimes customs men put an okay on boxes they’ve checked through. They write it on with chalk.”

They went around to the back, and while Ben and Mark hunched their shoulders against the rain, Jimmy poked one overcoated elbow through the glass in the back door until they could all climb inside.

The air was noxious and stale, the air of a room shut up for centuries rather than days. Ben poked his head out into the showroom, but there was no place to hide out there. Sparsely furnished, there was no sign that Straker had been replenishing his stock.

“Come here!” Jimmy called hoarsely, and Ben’s heart leaped into his throat.

Jimmy and Mark were standing by a long crate which Jimmy had partly pried open with the claw end of his hammer. Looking in, they could see one pale hand and a dark sleeve.

Without thinking, Ben attacked the crate. Jimmy was fumbling at the far end with the hammer.

“Ben,” Jimmy said, “you’re going to cut your hands. You—”

He hadn’t heard. He snapped boards off the crate, regardless of nails and splinters. They had him, they had the slimy night-thing, and he would pound the stake into him as he had pounded it into Susan, he would—

He snapped back another piece of the cheap wooden crating and looked into the dead, moon-pallid face of Mike Ryerson.

For a moment there was utter silence, and then they all let out their breath…it was as if a soft wind had coursed through the room.

“What do we do now?” Jimmy asked.

“We better get out to Mark’s house first,” Ben said. His voice was dull with disappointment. “We know where he is. We don’t even have a finished stake yet.”

They put the splintered strips of wood back helter-skelter.

“Better let me look at those hands,” Jimmy said. “They’re bleeding.”

“Later,” Ben said. “Come on.”

They went back around the building, all of them wordlessly glad to be back in the open air, and Jimmy drove the Buick up Jointner Avenue and into the residential part of town, just outside the skimpy business district. They arrived at Mark’s house perhaps sooner than any of them would have liked.

Father Callahan’s old sedan was parked behind Henry Petrie’s sensible Pinto runabout in the circular Petrie driveway. At the sight of it, Mark sucked in his breath and looked away. All color had drained out of his face.

“I can’t go in there,” he muttered. “I’m sorry. I’ll wait in the car.”

“Nothing to be sorry for, Mark,” Jimmy said.

He parked, turned off the ignition, and got out. Ben hesitated a minute, then put a hand on Mark’s shoulder. “Are you going to be all right?”

“Sure.” But he did not look all right. His chin was trembling and his eyes looked hollow. He suddenly turned to Ben and the hollowness was gone from the eyes and they were filled with simple pain, swimming with tears. “Cover them up, will you? If they’re dead, cover them up.”

“Sure I will,” Ben said.

“It’s better this way,” Mark said. “My father…he would have made a very successful vampire. Maybe as good as Barlow, in time. He…he was good at everything he tried. Maybe too good.”

“Try not to think too much,” Ben said, hating the lame sound of the words as they left his mouth. Mark looked up at him and smiled wanly.

“The woodpile’s around in the back,” Mark said. “You can go faster if you use my father’s lathe down in the basement.”

“All right,” Ben said. “Be easy, Mark. As easy as you can.”

But the boy was looking away now, swiping at his eyes with his arm.

He and Jimmy went up the back steps and inside.


THIRTY-FIVE

“Callahan’s not here,” Jimmy said flatly. They had gone through the entire house.

Ben forced himself to say it. “Barlow must have gotten him.”

He looked at the broken cross in his hand. It had been around Callahan’s neck yesterday. It was the only trace of him they had found. It had been lying next to the bodies of the Petries, who were very dead indeed. Their heads had been crushed together with force enough to literally shatter the skulls. Ben remembered the unnatural strength Mrs Glick had displayed and felt sick.

“Come on,” he said to Jimmy. “We’ve got to cover them up. I promised.”


THIRTY-SIX

They took the dustcover from the couch in the living room and covered them with that. Ben tried not to look at or think about what they were doing, but it was impossible. When the job was done, one hand—the cultivated, lacquered nails revealed it to be June Petrie’s—protruded from under the gaily patterned dustcover, and he poked it underneath with his toe, grimacing in an effort to keep his stomach under control. The shapes of the bodies under the cover were undeniable and unmistakable, making him think of news photos from Vietnam—battlefield dead and soldiers carrying dreadful burdens in black rubber sacks that looked absurdly like golf bags.

They went downstairs, each with an armload of yellow ash stove lengths.

The cellar had been Henry Petrie’s domain, and it reflected his personality perfectly: Three high-intensity lights had been hung in a straight line over the work area, each shaded with a wide metal shell that allowed the light to fall with strong brilliance on the planer, the jigsaw, the bench saw, the lathe, the electric sander. Ben saw that he had been building a bird hotel, probably to place in the backyard next spring, and the blueprint he had been working from was neatly laid out and held at each corner with machined metal paperweights. He had been doing a competent but uninspired job, and now it would never be finished. The floor was neatly swept, but a pleasantly nostalgic odor of sawdust hung in the air.

“This isn’t going to work at all,” Jimmy said.

“I know that,” Ben said.

“The woodpile,” Jimmy snorted, and let the wood fall from his arms in a lumbering crash. The stove lengths rolled wildly on the floor like jackstraws. He uttered a high, hysterical laugh.

“Jimmy—”

But his laugh cut across Ben’s attempt to speak like jags of piano wire. “We’re going to go out and end the scourge with a pile of wood from Henry Petrie’s back lot. How about some chair legs or baseball bats?”

“Jimmy, what else can we do?”

Jimmy looked at him and got himself under control with a visible effort. “Some treasure hunt,” he said. “Go forty paces into Charles Griffen’s north pasture and look under the large rock. Ha. Jesus. We can get out of town. We can do that.”

“Do you want to quit? Is that what you want?”

“No. But it isn’t going to be just today, Ben. It’s going to be weeks before we get them all, if we ever do. Can you stand that? Can you stand doing…doing what you did to Susan a thousand times? Pulling them out of their closets and their stinking little bolt holes screaming and struggling, only to pound a stake into their chest cavities and smash their hearts? Can you keep that up until November without going nuts?”

Ben thought about it and met a blank wall: utter incomprehension.

“I don’t know,” he said.

“Well, what about the kid? Do you think he can take it? He’ll be ready for the fucking nut hatch. And Matt will be dead. I’ll guarantee you that. And what do we do when the state cops start nosing around to find out what in hell happened to ’salem’s Lot? What do we tell them? ‘Pardon me while I stake this bloodsucker’? What about that, Ben?”

“How the hell should I know? Who’s had a chance to stop and think this thing out?”

They realized simultaneously that they were standing nose to nose, yelling at each other. “Hey,” Jimmy said. “Hey.”

Ben dropped his eyes. “I’m sorry.”

“No, my fault. We’re under pressure…what Barlow would undoubtedly call an end game.” He ran a hand through his carroty hair and looked around aimlessly. His eye suddenly lit on something beside Petrie’s blueprint and he picked it up. It was a black grease pencil.

“Maybe this is the best way,” he said.

“What?”

“You stay here, Ben. Start turning out stakes. If we’re going to do this, it’s got to be scientific. You’re the production department. Mark and I will be research. We’ll go through the town, looking for them. We’ll find them, too, just the way we found Mike. I can mark the locations with this grease pencil. Then, tomorrow, the stakes.”

“Won’t they see the marks and move?”

“I don’t think so. Mrs Glick didn’t look as though she was connecting too well. I think they move more on instinct than real thought. They might wise up after a while, start hiding better, but I think at first it would be like shooting fish in a barrel.”

“Why don’t I go?”

“Because I know the town, and the town knows me—like they knew my father. The live ones in the Lot are hiding in their houses today. If you come knocking, they won’t answer. If I come, most of them will. I know some of the hiding places. I know where the winos shack up out in the Marshes and where the pulp roads go. You don’t. Can you run that lathe?”

“Yes,” Ben said.

Jimmy was right, of course. Yet the relief he felt at not having to go out and face them made him feel guilty.

“Okay. Get going. It’s after noon now.”

Ben turned to the lathe, then paused. “If you want to wait a half hour, I can give you maybe half a dozen stakes to take with you.”

Jimmy paused a moment, then dropped his eyes. “Uh, I think tomorrow…tomorrow would be…”

“Okay,” Ben said. “Go on. Listen, why don’t you come back around three? Things ought to be quiet enough around that school by then so we can check it out.”

“Good.”

Jimmy stepped away from Petrie’s shop area and started for the stairs. Something—a half thought or perhaps inspiration—made him turn. He saw Ben across the basement, working under the bright glare of those three lights, hung neatly in a row.

Something…and it was gone.

He walked back.

Ben shut off the lathe and looked at him. “Something else?”

“Yeah,” Jimmy said. “On the tip of my tongue. But it’s stuck there.”

Ben raised his eyebrows.

“When I looked back from the stairs and saw you, something clicked. It’s gone now.”

“Important?”

“I don’t know.” He shuffled his feet purposelessly, wanting it to come back. Something about the image Ben had made, standing under those work lights, bent over the lathe. No good. Thinking about it only made it seem more distant.

He went up the stairs, but paused once more to look back. The image was hauntingly familiar, but it wouldn’t come. He went through the kitchen and out to the car. The rain had faded to drizzle.
