TWO

No one pronounced Jerusalem’s Lot dead on the morning of October 6; no one knew it was. Like the bodies of previous days, it retained every semblance of life.

Ruthie Crockett, who had lain pale and ill in bed all weekend, was gone on Monday morning. The disappearance went unreported. Her mother was down cellar, lying behind her shelves of preserves with a canvas tarpaulin pulled over her body, and Larry Crockett, who woke up very late indeed, simply assumed that his daughter had gotten herself off to school. He decided not to go into the office that day. He felt weak and washed out and lightheaded. Flu, or something. The light hurt his eyes. He got up and pulled down the shades, yelping once when the sunlight fell directly on his arm. He would have to replace that window some day when he felt better. Defective window glass was no joke. You could come home on a sunshiny day, find your house burning away six licks to the minute, and those insurance pricks in the home office called it spontaneous combustion and wouldn’t pay up. When he felt better was time enough. He thought about a cup of coffee and felt sick to his stomach. He wondered vaguely where his wife was, and then the subject slipped out of his mind. He went back to bed, fingering a funny little shaving nick just under his chin, pulled the sheet over his wan cheek, and went back to sleep.

His daughter, meanwhile, slept in enameled darkness within an abandoned freezer close to Dud Rogers—in the night world of her new existence, she found his advances among the heaped mounds of garbage very acceptable.

Loretta Starcher, the town librarian, had also disappeared, although there was no one in her disconnected spinster’s life to remark it. She now resided on the dark and musty third floor of the Jerusalem’s Lot Public Library. The third floor was always kept locked (she had the only key, always worn on a chain around her neck) except when some special supplicant could convince her that he was strong enough, intelligent enough, and moral enough to receive a special dispensation.

Now she rested there herself, a first edition of a different kind, as mint as when she had first entered the world. Her binding, so to speak, had never even been cracked.

The disappearance of Virgil Rathbun also went unnoticed. Franklin Boddin woke up at nine o’clock in their shack, noticed vaguely that Virgil’s pallet was empty, thought nothing of it, and started to get out of bed and see if there was a beer. He fell back, all rubber legs and reeling head.

Christ, he thought, drifting into sleep again. What was we into last night? Sterno?

And beneath the shack, in the cool of twenty seasons’ fallen leaves and among a galaxy of rusted beer cans popped down through the gaping floorboards in the front room, Virgil lay waiting for night. In the dark clay of his brain there were perhaps visions of a liquid more fiery than the finest scotch, more quenching than the finest wine.

Eva Miller missed Weasel Craig at breakfast but thought little of it. She was too busy directing the flow to and from the stove as her tenants rustled up their breakfasts and then stumbled forth to look another work week in the eye. Then she was too busy putting things to rights and washing the plates of that damned Grover Verrill and that no good Mickey Sylvester, both of whom had been consistently ignoring the “Please wash up your dishes” sign taped over the sink for years.

But as the silence crept back into the day and the frantic bulge of breakfast work merged into the steady routine of things to be done, she missed him again. Monday was garbage-collection day on Railroad Street, and Weasel always took the big green bags of rubbish out to the curb for Royal Snow to pick up in his dilapidated old International Harvester truck. Today the green bags were still out on the back steps.

She went to his room and knocked gently. “Ed?”

There was no response. On another day she would have assumed his drunkenness and simply have put the bags out herself, her lips slightly more compressed than usual. But this morning a faint thread of disquiet wormed into her, and she turned the doorknob and poked her head in. “Ed?” she called softly.

The room was empty. The window by the head of the bed was open, the curtains fluttering randomly in and out with the vagaries of the light breeze. The bed was wrinkled and she made it without thinking, her hands doing their own work. Stepping over to the other side, her right loafer crunched in something. She looked down and saw Weasel’s horn-backed mirror, shattered on the floor. She picked it up and turned it over in her hands, frowning. It had been his mother’s, and he had once turned down an antique dealer’s offer of ten dollars for it. And that had been after he started drinking.

She got the dustpan from the hall closet and brushed up the glass with slow, thoughtful gestures. She knew Weasel had been sober when he went to bed the night before, and there was no place he could buy beer after nine o’clock, unless he had hitched a ride out to Dell’s or into Cumberland.

She dumped the fragments of broken mirror into Weasel’s wastebasket, seeing herself reflected over and over for a brief second. She looked into the wastebasket but saw no empty bottle there. Secret drinking was really not Ed Craig’s style, anyway.

Well. He’ll turn up.

But going downstairs, the disquiet remained. Without consciously admitting it to herself she knew that her feelings for Weasel went a bit deeper than friendly concern.

“Ma’am?”

She started from her thoughts and regarded the stranger in her kitchen. The stranger was a little boy, neatly dressed in corduroy pants and a clean blue T-shirt. Looks like he fell off his bike. He looked familiar, but she couldn’t quite pin him down. From one of the new families out on Jointner Avenue, most likely.

“Does Mr Ben Mears live here?”

Eva began to ask why he wasn’t in school, then didn’t. His expression was very serious, even grave. There were blue hollows under his eyes.

“He’s sleeping.”

“May I wait?”

Homer McCaslin had gone directly from Green’s Mortuary to the Norton home on Brock Street. It was eleven o’clock by the time he got there. Mrs Norton was in tears, and while Bill Norton seemed calm enough, he was chain-smoking and his face looked drawn.

McCaslin agreed to put the girl’s description on the wire. Yes, he would call as soon as he heard something. Yes, he would check the hospitals in the area, it was part of the routine (so was the morgue). He privately thought the girl might have gone off in a tiff. The mother admitted they had quarreled and that the girl had been talking of moving out.

Nonetheless, he cruised some of the back roads, one ear comfortably cocked to the crackle of static coming from the radio slung under the dash. At a few minutes past midnight, coming up the Brooks Road toward town, the spotlight he had trained on the soft shoulder of the road glinted off metal—a car parked in the woods.

He stopped, backed up, got out. The car was parked partway up an old disused wood-road. Chevy Vega, light brown, two years old. He pulled his heavy chained notebook out of his back pocket, paged past the interview with Ben and Jimmy, and trained his light on the license number Mrs Norton had given him. It matched. The girl’s car, all right. That made things more serious. He laid his hand on the hood. Cool. It had been parked for a while.

“Sheriff?”

A light, carefree voice, like tinkling bells. Why had his hand dropped to the butt of his gun?

He turned and saw the Norton girl, looking incredibly beautiful, walking toward him hand in hand with a stranger—a young man with black hair unfashionably combed straight back from his forehead. McCaslin shone the flashlight at his face and had the oddest impression that the light was shining right through it without illuminating it in the slightest. And although they were walking, they left no tracks in the soft dirt. He felt fear and warning kindle in his nerves, his hand tightened on his revolver…and then loosened. He clicked off his flashlight and waited passively.

“Sheriff,” she said, and now her voice was low, caressing.

“How good of you to come,” the stranger said.

They fell on him.

Now his patrol car was parked far out on the rutted and brambled dead end of the Deep Cut Road, with hardly a twinkle of chrome showing through the heavy strands of juniper, bracken, and Lolly-come-see-me. McCaslin was curled up in the trunk. The radio called him at regular intervals unheeded.

Later that same morning Susan paid a short visit to her mother but did little damage; like a leech that had fed well on a slow swimmer, she was satisfied. Still, she had been invited in and now she could come and go as she pleased. There would be a new hunger tonight…every night.

Charles Griffen had wakened his wife at a little after five on that Monday morning, his face long and chiseled into sardonic lines by his anger. Outside, the cows were bawling unmilked with full udders. He summed up the work of the night in six words:

“Those damned boys have run off.”

But they had not. Danny Glick had found and battened upon Jack Griffen and Jack had gone to his brother Hal’s room and had finally ended his worries of school and books and unyielding fathers forever. Now both of them lay in the center of a huge pile of loose hay in the upper mow, with chaff in their hair and sweet motes of pollen dancing in the dark and tideless channels of their noses. An occasional mouse scampered across their faces.

Now the light had spilled across the land, and all evil things slept. It was to be a beautiful autumn day, crisp and clear and filled with sunshine. By and large the town (not knowing it was dead) would go off to their jobs with no inkling of the night’s work. According to the Old Farmer, sunset Monday night would come at 7:00 pm sharp.

The days shortened, moving toward Halloween, and beyond that, winter.


THREE

When Ben came downstairs at quarter to nine, Eva Miller said from the sink, “There’s someone waiting to see you on the porch.”

He nodded and went out the back door, still in his slippers, expecting to see either Susan or Sheriff McCaslin. But the visitor was a small, economical boy sitting on the top step of the porch and looking out over the town, which was coming slowly to its Monday morning vitality.

“Hello?” Ben said, and the boy turned around quickly.

They looked at each other for no great space of time, but for Ben the moment seemed to undergo a queer stretching, and a feeling of unreality swept him. The boy reminded him physically of the boy he himself had been, but it was more than that. He seemed to feel a weight settle onto his neck, as if in a curious way he sensed the more-than-chance coming together of their lives. It made him think of the day he had met Susan in the park, and how their light, get-acquainted conversation had seemed queerly heavy and fraught with intimations of the future.

Perhaps the boy felt something similar, for his eyes widened slightly and his hand found the porch railing, as if for support.

“You’re Mr Mears,” the boy said, not questioning.

“Yes. You have the advantage, I’m afraid.”

“My name is Mark Petrie,” the boy said. “I have some bad news for you.”

And I bet he does, too, Ben thought dismally, and tried to tighten his mind against whatever it might be—but when it came, it was a total, shocking surprise.

“Susan Norton is one of them,” the boy said. “Barlow got her at the house. But I killed Straker. At least, I think I did.”

Ben tried to speak and couldn’t. His throat was locked.

The boy nodded, taking charge effortlessly. “Maybe we could go for a ride in your car and talk. I don’t want anyone to see me around. I’m playing hooky and I’m already in dutch with my folks.”

Ben said something—he didn’t know what. After the motorcycle accident that had killed Miranda, he had picked himself up off the pavement shaken but unhurt (except for a small scratch across the back of his left hand, mustn’t forget that, Purple Hearts had been awarded for less) and the truck driver had walked over to him, casting two shadows in the glow of the streetlight and the headlamps of the truck—he was a big, balding man with a pen in the breast pocket of his white shirt, and stamped in gold letters on the barrel of the pen he could read “Frank’s Mobil Sta” and the rest was hidden by the pocket, but Ben had guessed shrewdly that the final letters were “tion,” elementary, my dear Watson, elementary. The truck driver had said something to Ben, he didn’t remember what, and then he took Ben’s arm gently, trying to lead him away. He saw one of Miranda’s flat-heeled shoes lying near the large rear wheels of the moving van and had shaken the trucker off and started toward it and the trucker had taken two steps after him and said, I wouldn’t do that, buddy. And Ben had looked up at him dumbly, unhurt except for the small scratch across the back of his left hand, wanting to tell the trucker that five minutes ago this hadn’t happened, wanting to tell the trucker that in some parallel world he and Miranda had taken a left at the corner one block back and were riding into an entirely different future. A crowd was gathering, coming out of a liquor store on one corner and a small milk-and-sandwich bar on the other. And he had begun to feel then what he was feeling now: the complex and awful mental and physical interaction that is the beginning of acceptance, and the only counterpart to that feeling is rape. The stomach seems to drop. The lips become numb. A thin foam forms on the roof of the mouth. There is a ringing noise in the ears. The skin on the testicles seems to crawl and tighten. The mind goes through a turning away, a hiding of its face, as from a light too brilliant to bear. He had shaken off the well-meaning truck driver’s hands a second time and had walked over to the shoe. He picked it up. He turned it over. He placed his hand inside it, and the insole was still warm from her foot. Carrying it, he had gone two steps further and had seen her sprawled legs under the truck’s front wheels, clad in the yellow Wranglers she had pulled on with such careless and laughing ease back at the apartment. It was impossible to believe that the girl who had pulled on those slacks was dead, yet the acceptance was there, in his belly, his mouth, his balls. He had groaned aloud, and that was when the tabloid photographer had snapped his picture for Mabel’s paper. One shoe off, one shoe on. People looking at her bare foot as if they had never seen one before. He had taken two steps away and leaned over and—

“I’m going to be sick,” he said.

“That’s all right.”

Ben stepped behind his Citroën and doubled over, holding on to the door handle. He closed his eyes, feeling darkness wash over him, and in the darkness Susan’s face appeared, smiling at him and looking at him with those lovely deep eyes. He opened his eyes again. It occurred to him that the kid might be lying, or mixed up, or an out-and-out psycho. Yet the thought brought him no hope. The kid was not set up like that. He turned back and looked into the kid’s face and read concern there—nothing else.

“Come on,” he said.

The boy got in the car and they drove off. Eva Miller watched them go from the kitchen window, her brow creased. Something bad was happening. She felt it, was filled with it, the same way she had been filled with an obscure and cloudy dread on the day her husband died.

She got up and dialed Loretta Starcher. The phone rang over and over without answer until she put it back in the cradle. Where could she be? Certainly not at the library. It was closed Mondays.

She sat, looking pensively at the telephone. She felt that some great disaster was in the wind—perhaps something as terrible as the fire of ’51.

At last she picked up the phone again and called Mabel Werts, who was filled with the gossip of the hour and eager for more. The town hadn’t known such a weekend in years.


FOUR

Ben drove aimlessly and without direction as Mark told his story. He told it well, beginning with the night Danny Glick had come to his window and ending with his nocturnal visitor early this morning.

“Are you sure it was Susan?” he asked.

Mark Petrie nodded.

Ben pulled an abrupt U-turn and accelerated back up Jointner Avenue.

“Where are you going? To the—”

“Not there. Not yet.”


FIVE

“Wait. Stop.”

Ben pulled over and they got out together. They had been driving slowly down the Brooks Road, at the bottom of Marsten’s Hill. The wood-road where Homer McCaslin had spotted Susan’s Vega. They had both caught the glint of sun on metal. They walked up the disused road together, not speaking. There were deep and dusty wheel ruts, and the grass grew high between them. A bird twitted somewhere.

They found the car shortly.

Ben hesitated, then halted. He felt sick to his stomach again. The sweat on his arms was cold.

“Go look,” he said.

Mark went down to the car and leaned in the driver’s side window. “Keys are in it,” he called back.

Ben began to walk toward the car and his foot kicked something. He looked down and saw a .38 revolver lying in the dust. He picked it up and turned it over in his hands. It looked very much like a police issue revolver.

“Whose gun?” Mark asked, walking toward him. He had Susan’s keys in his hand.

“I don’t know.” He checked the safety to be sure it was on, and then put the gun in his pocket.

Mark offered him the keys and Ben took them and walked toward the Vega, feeling like a man in a dream. His hands were shaking and he had to poke twice before he could get the right key into the trunk slot. He twisted it and pulled the back deck up without allowing himself to think.

They looked in together. The trunk held a spare tire, a jack, and nothing else. Ben felt his breath come out in a rush.

“Now?” Mark asked.

Ben didn’t answer for a moment. When he felt that his voice would be under control, he said, “We’re going to see a friend of mine named Matt Burke, who is in the hospital. He’s been researching vampires.”

The urgency in the boy’s gaze remained. “Do you believe me?”

“Yes,” Ben said, and hearing the word on the air seemed to confirm it and give it weight. It was beyond recall. “Yes, I believe you.”

“Mr Burke is from the high school, isn’t he? Does he know about this?”

“Yes. So does his doctor.”

“Dr Cody?”

“Yes.”

They were both looking at the car as they spoke, as if it were a relic of some dark, lost race which they had discovered in these sunny woods to the west of town. The trunk gaped open like a mouth, and as Ben slammed it shut, the dull thud of its latching echoed in his heart.

“And after we talk,” he said, “we’re going up to the Marsten House and get the son of a bitch who did this.”

Mark looked at him without moving. “It may not be as easy as you think. She will be there, too. She’s his now.”

“He’s going to wish he never saw ’salem’s Lot,” he said softly. “Come on.”


SIX

They arrived at the hospital at nine-thirty, and Jimmy Cody was in Matt’s room. He looked at Ben, unsmiling, and then his eyes flicked to Mark Petrie with curiosity.

“I’ve got some bad news for you, Ben. Sue Norton has disappeared.”

“She’s a vampire,” Ben said flatly, and Matt grunted from his bed.

“Are you sure of that?” Jimmy asked sharply.

Ben cocked his thumb at Mark Petrie and introduced him. “Mark here had a little visit from Danny Glick on Saturday night. He can tell you the rest.”

Mark told it from beginning to end, just as he had told Ben earlier.

Matt spoke first when he had finished. “Ben, there are no words to say how sorry I am.”

“I can give you something if you need it,” Jimmy said.

“I know what medicine I need, Jimmy. I want to move against this Barlow today. Now. Before dark.”

“All right,” Jimmy said. “I’ve canceled all my calls. And I phoned the county sheriff ’s office. McCaslin is gone, too.”

“Maybe that explains this,” Ben said, and took the pistol out of his pocket and dropped it onto Matt’s bedside table. It looked strange and out of place in the hospital room.

“Where did you get this?” Jimmy asked, picking it up.

“Out by Susan’s car.”

“Then I can guess. McCaslin went to the Norton house sometime after he left us. He got the story on Susan, including the make, model, and license number of her car. Went out cruising some of the back roads, just on the off-chance. And—”

Broken silence in the room. None of them needed it filled.

“Foreman’s is still closed,” Jimmy said. “And a lot of the old men who hang around Crossen’s have been complaining about the dump. No one has seen Dud Rogers for a week.”

They looked at each other bleakly.

“I spoke with Father Callahan last night,” Matt said. “He has agreed to go along, providing you two—plus Mark, of course—will stop at this new shop and talk to Straker first.”

“I don’t think he’ll be talking to anyone today,” Mark said quietly.

“What did you find out about them?” Jimmy asked Matt. “Anything useful?”

“Well, I think I’ve put some of the pieces together. Straker must be this thing’s human watchdog and bodyguard…a kind of human familiar. He must have been in town long before Barlow appeared. There were certain rites to be performed, in propitiation of the Dark Father. Even Barlow has his Master, you see.” He looked at them somberly. “I rather suspect no one will ever find a trace of Ralphie Glick. I think he was Barlow’s ticket of admission. Straker took him and sacrificed him.”

“Bastard,” Jimmy said distantly.

“And Danny Glick?” Ben asked.

“Straker bled him first,” Matt said. “His Master’s gift. First blood for the faithful servant. Later, Barlow would have taken over that job himself. But Straker performed another service for his Master before Barlow ever arrived. Do any of you know what?”

For a moment there was silence, and then Mark said quite distinctly, “The dog that man found on the cemetery gate.”

“What?” Jimmy said. “Why? Why would he do that?”

“The white eyes,” Mark said, and then looked questioningly at Matt, who was nodding with some surprise.

“All last night I nodded over these books, not knowing we had a scholar in our midst.” The boy blushed a little. “What Mark says is exactly right. According to several of the standard references on folklore and the supernatural, one way to frighten a vampire away is to paint white ‘angel eyes’ over the real eyes of a black dog. Win’s Doc was all black except for two white patches. Win used to call them his headlights—they were directly over his eyes. He let the dog run at night. Straker must have spotted it, killed it, and then hung it on the cemetery gate.”

“And how about this Barlow?” Jimmy asked. “How did he get to town?”

Matt shrugged. “I have no way of telling. I think that we must assume, in line with the legends, that he is old…very old. He may have changed his name a dozen times, or a thousand. He may have been a native of almost every country in the world at one time or another, although I suspect his origins may have been Romanian or Magyar or Hungarian. It doesn’t really matter how he got to town anyway…although I wouldn’t be surprised to find out Larry Crockett had a hand in it. He’s here. That’s the important thing.

“Now, here is what you must do: Take a stake when you go. And a gun, in case Straker is still alive. Sheriff McCaslin’s revolver will serve the purpose. The stake must pierce the heart or the vampire may rise again. Jimmy, you can check that. When you have staked him you must cut off his head, stuff the mouth with garlic, and turn it facedown in the coffin. In most vampire fiction, Hollywood and otherwise, the staked vampire mortifies almost instantly into dust. This may not happen in real life. If it doesn’t, you must weight the coffin and throw it into running water. I would suggest the Royal River. Do you have questions?”

There were none.

“Good. You must each carry a vial of holy water and a bit of the Host. And you must each have Father Callahan hear your confession before you go.”

“I don’t think any of us are Catholic,” Ben said.

“I am,” Jimmy said. “Nonpracticing.”

“Nonetheless, you will make a confession and an act of contrition. Then you go pure, washed in Christ’s blood…clean blood, not tainted.”

“All right,” Ben said.

“Ben, had you slept with Susan? Forgive me, but—”

“Yes,” he said.

“Then you must pound the stake—first into Barlow, then into her. You are the only person in this little party who has been hurt personally. You will act as her husband. And you mustn’t falter. You’ll be releasing her.”

“All right,” he said again.

“Above all”—his glance swept all of them—“you must not look in his eyes! If you do, he’ll catch you and turn you against the others, even at the expense of your own life. Remember Floyd Tibbits! That makes it dangerous to carry a gun, even if it’s necessary. Jimmy, you take it, and hang back a little. If you have to examine either Barlow or Susan, give it to Mark.”

“Understood,” Jimmy said.

“Remember to buy garlic. And roses, if you can. Is that little flower shop in Cumberland still open, Jimmy?”

“The Northern Belle? I think so.”

“A white rose for each of you. Tie them in your hair or around your neck. And I’ll repeat myself—don’t look in his eyes! I could keep you here and tell you a hundred other things, but you better go along. It’s ten o’clock already, and Father Callahan may be having second thoughts. My best wishes and my prayers go with you. Praying is quite a trick for an old agnostic like me, too. But I don’t think I’m as agnostic as I once was. Was it Carlyle who said that if a man dethrones God in his heart, then Satan must ascend to His position?”

No one answered, and Matt sighed. “Jimmy, I want a closer look at your neck.”

Jimmy stepped to the bedside and lifted his chin. The wounds were obviously punctures, but they had both scabbed over and seemed to be healing nicely.

“Any pain? Itching?” Matt asked.

“No.”

“You were very lucky,” he said, looking at Jimmy soberly.

“I’m starting to think I was luckier than I’ll ever know.”

Matt leaned back in his bed. His face looked drawn, the eyes deeply socketed. “I will take the pill Ben refused, if you please.”

“I’ll tell one of the nurses.”

“I’ll sleep while you go about your work,” Matt said. “Later there is another matter…well, enough of that.” His eyes shifted to Mark. “You did a remarkable thing yesterday, boy. Foolish and reckless, but remarkable.”

“She paid for it,” Mark said quietly, and clasped his hands together in front of him. They were trembling.

“Yes, and you may have to pay again. Any of you, or all of you. Don’t underestimate him! And now, if you don’t mind, I’m very tired. I was reading most of the night. Call me the very minute the work is done.”

They left. In the hall Ben looked at Jimmy and said, “Did he remind you of anyone?”

“Yes,” Jimmy said. “Van Helsing.”


SEVEN

At quarter past ten, Eva Miller went down cellar to get two jars of corn to take to Mrs Norton who, according to Mabel Werts, was in bed. Eva had spent most of September in a steamy kitchen, toiling over her canning operations, blanching vegetables and putting them up, putting paraffin plugs in the tops of Ball jars to cover homemade jelly. There were well over two hundred glass jars neatly shelved in her spick-and-span dirt-floored basement—canning was one of her great joys. Later in the year, as fall drifted into winter and the holidays neared, she would add mincemeat.

The smell struck her as soon as she opened the cellar door.

“Gosh’n fishes,” she muttered under her breath, and went down gingerly, as if wading into a polluted pool. Her husband had built the cellar himself, rock-walling it for coolness. Every now and then a muskrat or woodchuck or mink would crawl into one of the wide chinks and die there. That was what must have happened, although she could never recall a stink this strong.

She reached the lower floor and went along the walls, squinting in the faint overhead glow of the two sixty-watt bulbs. Those should be replaced with seventy-fives, she thought. She got her preserves, neatly labeled corn in her own careful blue script (a slice of red pepper on the top of every one), and continued her inspection, even squeezing into the space behind the huge, multi-duct furnace. Nothing.

She arrived back at the steps leading up to her kitchen and stared around, frowning, hands on hips. The large cellar was much neater since she had hired two of Larry Crockett’s boys to build a tool shed behind her house two years ago. There was the furnace, looking like an Impressionist sculpture of the goddess Kali with its score of pipes twisting off in all directions; the storm windows that she would have to get on soon now that October had come and heating was so dear; the tarpaulin-covered pool table that had been Ralph’s. She had the felt carefully vacuumed each May, although no one had played on it since Ralph had died in 1959. Nothing much else down here now. A box of paperbacks she had collected for the Cumberland Hospital, a snow shovel with a broken handle, a pegboard with some of Ralph’s old tools hanging from it, a trunk containing drapes that were probably all mildewed by now.

Still, the stink persisted.

Her eyes fixed on the small half-door that led down to the root cellar, but she wasn’t going down there, not today. Besides, the walls of the root cellar were solid concrete. Unlikely that an animal could have gotten in there. Still—

“Ed?” she called suddenly, for no reason at all. The flat sound of her voice scared her.

The word died in the dimly lit cellar. Now, why had she done that? What in God’s name would Ed Craig be doing down here, even if there was a place to hide? Drinking? Offhand, she couldn’t think of a more depressing place in town to drink than here in her cellar. More likely he was off in the woods with that good-for-nothing friend of his, Virge Rathbun, guzzling someone’s dividend.

Yet she lingered a moment longer, sweeping her gaze around. The rotten stink was awful, just awful. She hoped she wouldn’t have to have the place fumigated.

With a last glance at the root cellar door, she went back upstairs.


EIGHT

Father Callahan heard them out, all three, and by the time he was brought up to date, it was a little after eleven-thirty. They were sitting in the cool and spacious sitting room of the rectory, and the sun flooded in the large front windows in bars that looked thick enough to slice. Watching the dust motes that danced dreamily in the sun shafts, Callahan was reminded of an old cartoon he had seen somewhere. Cleaning woman with a broom is staring in surprise down at the floor; she has swept away part of her shadow. He felt a little like that now. For the second time in twenty-four hours he had been confronted with a stark impossibility—only now the impossibility had corroboration from a writer, a seemingly levelheaded little boy, and a doctor whom the town respected. Still, an impossibility was an impossibility. You couldn’t sweep away your own shadow. Except that it seemed to have happened.

“This would be much easier to accept if you could have arranged for a thunderstorm and a power failure,” he said.

“It’s quite true,” Jimmy said. “I assure you.” His hand went to his neck.

Father Callahan got up and pulled something out of Jimmy’s black bag—two truncated baseball bats with sharpened points. He turned one of them over in his hands and said, “Just a moment, Mrs Smith. This won’t hurt a bit.”

No one laughed.

Callahan put the stakes back, went to the window, and looked out at Jointner Avenue. “You are all very persuasive,” he said. “And I suppose I must add one little piece which you now do not have in your possession.”

He turned back to them.

“There is a sign in the window of the Barlow and Straker Furniture Shop,” he said. “It says, ‘Closed Until Further Notice.’ I went down this morning myself promptly at nine o’clock to discuss Mr Burke’s allegations with your mysterious Mr Straker. The shop is locked, front and back.”

“You have to admit that jibes with what Mark says,” Ben remarked.

“Perhaps. And perhaps it’s only chance. Let me ask you again: Are you sure you must have the Catholic Church in this?”

“Yes,” Ben said. “But we’ll proceed without you if we have to. If it comes to that, I’ll go alone.”

“No need of that,” Father Callahan said, rising. “Follow me across to the church, gentlemen, and I will hear your confessions.”


NINE

Ben knelt awkwardly in the darkened mustiness of the confessional, his mind whirling, his thoughts inchoate. Flicking through them was a succession of surreal images: Susan in the park; Mrs Glick backing away from the makeshift tongue-depressor cross, her mouth an open, writhing wound; Floyd Tibbits coming out of his car in a lurch, dressed like a scarecrow, charging him; Mark Petrie leaning in the window of Susan’s car. For the first and only time, the possibility that all of this might be a dream occurred to him, and his tired mind clutched at it eagerly.

His eye fell on something in the corner of the confessional, and he picked it up curiously. It was an empty Junior Mints box, fallen from the pocket of some little boy, perhaps. A touch of reality that was undeniable. The cardboard was real and tangible under his fingers. This nightmare was real.

The little sliding door opened. He looked at it but could see nothing beyond. There was a heavy screen in the opening.

“What should I do?” he asked the screen.

“Say, ‘Bless me, Father, for I have sinned.’”

“Bless me, Father, for I have sinned,” Ben said, his voice sounding strange and heavy in the enclosed space.

“Now tell me your sins.”

“All of them?” Ben asked, appalled.

“Try to be representative,” Callahan said, his voice dry. “I know we have something to do before dark.”

Thinking hard and trying to keep the Ten Commandments before him as a kind of sorting screen, Ben began. It didn’t become easier as he went along. There was no sense of catharsis—only the dull embarrassment that went with telling a stranger the mean secrets of his life. Yet he could see how this ritual could become compulsive: as bitterly compelling as strained rubbing alcohol for the chronic drinker or the pictures behind the loose board in the bathroom for an adolescent boy. There was something medieval about it, something accursed—a ritual act of regurgitation. He found himself remembering a scene from the Bergman picture The Seventh Seal, where a crowd of ragged penitents proceeds through a town stricken with the black plague. The penitents were scourging themselves with birch branches, making themselves bleed. The hatefulness of baring himself this way (and perversely, he would not allow himself to lie, although he could have done so quite convincingly) made the day’s purpose real in the final sense, and he could almost see the word “vampire” printed on the black screen of his mind, not in scare movie-poster print, but in small, economical letters that were made to be a woodcut or scratched on a scroll. He felt helpless in the grip of this alien ritual, out of joint with his time. The confessional might have been a direct pipeline to the days when werewolves and incubi and witches were an accepted part of the outer darkness and the church the only beacon of light. For the first time in his life he felt the slow, terrible beat and swell of the ages and saw his life as a dim and glimmering spark in an edifice which, if seen clearly, might drive all men mad. Matt had not told them of Father Callahan’s conception of his church as a Force, but Ben would have understood that now. He could feel the Force in this fetid little box, beating in on him, leaving him naked and contemptible. He felt it as no Catholic, raised to confession since earliest childhood, could have.

When he stepped out, the fresh air from the open doors struck him thankfully. He wiped at his neck with the palm of his hand and it came away sweaty.

Callahan stepped out. “You’re not done yet,” he said.

Wordlessly, Ben stepped back inside, but did not kneel. Callahan gave him an act of contrition—ten Our Fathers and ten Hail Marys.

“I don’t know that one,” Ben said.

“I’ll give you a card with the prayer written on it,” the voice on the other side of the screen said. “You can say them to yourself while we ride over to Cumberland.”

Ben hesitated a moment. “Matt was right, you know. When he said it was going to be harder than we thought. We’re going to sweat blood before this is over.”

“Yes?” Callahan said—polite or just dubious? Ben couldn’t tell. He looked down and saw he was still holding the Junior Mints box. He had crushed it to a shapeless pulp with the convulsive squeezing of his right hand.


TEN

It was nearing one o’clock when they all got in Jimmy Cody’s large Buick and set off. None of them spoke. Father Donald Callahan was wearing his full gown, a surplice, and a white stole bordered with purple. He had given them each a small tube of water from the Holy Font, and had blessed them each with the sign of the cross. He held a small silver pyx on his lap which contained several pieces of the Host.

They stopped at Jimmy’s Cumberland office first, and Jimmy left the motor idling while he went inside. When he came out, he was wearing a baggy sport coat that concealed the bulge of McCaslin’s revolver and carrying an ordinary Craftsman hammer in his right hand.

Ben looked at it with some fascination and saw from the tail of his eye that Mark and Callahan were also staring. The hammer had a blue steel head and a perforated rubber handgrip.

“Ugly, isn’t it?” Jimmy remarked.

Ben thought of using that hammer on Susan, using it to ram a stake between her breasts, and felt his stomach flip over slowly, like an airplane doing a slow roll.

“Yes,” he said, and moistened his lips. “It’s ugly, all right.”

They drove to the Cumberland Stop and Shop. Ben and Jimmy went into the supermarket and picked up all the garlic that was displayed along the vegetable counter—twelve boxes of the whitish-gray bulbs. The checkout girl raised her eyebrows and said, “Glad I ain’t going on a long ride with you boys t’night.”

Going out, Ben said idly, “I wonder what the basis of garlic’s effectiveness against them is? Something in the Bible, or an ancient curse, or—”

“I suspect it’s an allergy,” Jimmy said.

“Allergy?”

Callahan caught the last of it and asked for a repetition as they drove toward the Northern Belle Flower Shop.

“Oh yes, I agree with Dr Cody,” he said. “Probably is an allergy…if it works as a deterrent at all. Remember, that’s not proved yet.”

“That’s a funny idea for a priest,” Mark said.

“Why? If I must accept the existence of vampires (and it seems I must, at least for the time being), must I also accept them as creatures beyond the bounds of all natural laws? Some, certainly. Folklore says they can’t be seen in mirrors, that they can transform themselves into bats or wolves or birds—the so-called psychopompos—that they can narrow their bodies and slip through the tiniest cracks. Yet we know they see, and hear, and speak…and they most certainly taste. Perhaps they also know discomfort, pain—”

“And love?” Ben asked, looking straight ahead.

“No,” Jimmy answered. “I suspect that love is beyond them.” He pulled into a small parking lot beside an L-shaped flower shop with an attached greenhouse.

A small bell tinkled over the door when they went in, and the heavy aroma of flowers struck them. Ben felt sickened by the cloying heaviness of their mixed perfumes, and was reminded of funeral parlors.

“Hi there.” A tall man in a canvas apron came toward them, holding an earthen flowerpot in one hand.

Ben had only started to explain what they wanted when the man in the apron shook his head and interrupted.

“You’re late, I’m afraid. A man came in last Friday and bought every rose I had in stock—red, white, and yellow. I’ll have no more until Wednesday at least. If you’d care to order—”

“What did this man look like?”

“Very striking,” the proprietor said, putting his pot down. “Tall, totally bald. Piercing eyes. Smoked foreign cigarettes, by the smell. He had to take the flowers out in three armloads. He put them in the back of a very old car, a Dodge, I think—”

“Packard,” Ben said. “A black Packard.”

“You know him, then.”

“In a manner of speaking.”

“He paid cash. Very unusual, considering the size of the order. But perhaps if you get in touch with him, he would sell you—”

“Perhaps,” Ben said.

In the car again, they talked it over.

“There’s a shop in Falmouth—” Father Callahan began doubtfully.

“No!” Ben said. “No!” And the raw edge of hysteria in his voice made them all look around. “And when we got to Falmouth and found that Straker had been there, too? What then? Portland? Kittery? Boston? Don’t you realize what’s happening? He’s foreseen us! He’s leading us by the nose!”

“Ben, be reasonable,” Jimmy said. “Don’t you think we ought to at least—”

“Don’t you remember what Matt said? ‘You mustn’t go into this feeling that because he can’t rise in the daytime he can’t harm you.’ Look at your watch, Jimmy.”

Jimmy did. “Two-fifteen,” he said slowly, and looked up at the sky as if doubting the truth on the dial. But it was true; now the shadows were going the other way.

“He’s anticipated us,” Ben said. “He’s been four jumps ahead every mile of the way. Did we—could we—actually think that he would be blissfully unaware of us? That he never took the possibility of discovery and opposition into account? We have to go now, before we waste the rest of the day arguing about how many angels can dance on the head of a pin.”

“He’s right,” Callahan said quietly. “I think we had better stop talking and get going.”

“Then drive,” Mark said urgently.

Jimmy pulled out of the flower-shop parking lot fast, screeching the tires on the pavement. The proprietor stared after them, three men, one of them a priest, and a little boy who sat in a car with M.D. plates and shouted at each other of total lunacies.


ELEVEN

Cody came at the Marsten House from the Brooks Road, on the village’s blind side, and Donald Callahan, looking at it from this new angle, thought: Why, it actually looms over the town. Strange I never saw it before. It must have perfect elevation there, perched on its hill high above the crossroads of Jointner Avenue and Brock Street. Perfect elevation and a very nearly 360° view of the township itself. It was a huge and rambling place, and with the shutters closed it took on an uncomfortable, overlarge configuration in the mind; it became a sarcophaguslike monolith, an evocation of doom.

And it was the site of both suicide and murder, which meant it stood on unhallowed ground.

He opened his mouth to say so, and then thought better of it.

Cody turned off onto the Brooks Road, and for a moment the house was blotted out by trees. Then they thinned, and Cody was turning into the driveway. The Packard was parked just outside the garage, and when Jimmy turned off the car, he drew McCaslin’s revolver.

Callahan felt the atmosphere of the place seize him at once. He took a crucifix—his mother’s—from his pocket and slipped it around his neck with his own. No bird sang in these fall-denuded trees. The long and ragged grass seemed even drier and more dehydrated than the end of the season warranted; the ground itself seemed gray and used up.

The steps leading up to the porch were warped crazily, and there was a brighter square of paint on one of the porch posts where a no-trespassing sign had recently been taken down. A new Yale lock glittered brassily below the old rusted bolt on the front door.

“A window, maybe, like Mark—” Jimmy began hesitantly.

“No,” Ben said. “Right through the front door. We’ll break it down if we have to.”

“I don’t think that will be necessary,” Callahan said, and his voice did not seem to be his own. When they got out, he led them without stopping to think about it. An eagerness—the old eagerness he was sure had gone forever—seemed to seize him as he approached the door. The house seemed to lean around them, to almost ooze its evil from the cracked pores of its paint. Yet he did not hesitate. Any thought of temporizing was gone. In the last moments he did not lead them so much as he was impelled.

“In the name of God the Father!” he cried, and his voice took on a hoarse, commanding note that made them all draw closer to him. “I command the evil to be gone from this house! Spirits, depart!” And without being aware he was going to do it, he smote the door with the crucifix in his hand.

There was a flash of light—afterward they all agreed there had been—a pungent whiff of ozone, and a crackling sound, as if the boards themselves had screamed. The curved fanlight above the door suddenly exploded outward, and the large bay window to the left that overlooked the lawn coughed its glass onto the grass at the same instant. Jimmy cried out. The new Yale lock lay on the boards at their feet, welded into an almost unrecognizable mass. Mark bent to poke it and then yelped.

“Hot,” he said.

Callahan withdrew from the door, trembling. He looked down at the cross in his hand. “This is, without a doubt, the most amazing thing that’s ever happened to me in my life,” he said. He glanced up at the sky, as if to see the very face of God, but the sky was indifferent.

Ben pushed at the door and it swung open easily. But he waited for Callahan to go in first. In the hall Callahan looked at Mark.

“The cellar,” he said. “You get to it through the kitchen. Straker’s upstairs. But—” He paused, frowning. “Something’s different. I don’t know what. Something’s not the same as it was.”

They went upstairs first, and even though Ben was not in the lead, he felt a prickle of very old terror as they approached the door at the end of the hall. Here, almost a month to the day after he had come back to ’salem’s Lot, he was to get his second look into that room. When Callahan pushed the door open, he glanced upward…and felt the scream well up in his throat and out of his mouth before he could stop it. It was high, womanish, hysterical.

But it was not Hubert Marsten hanging from the overhead beam, or his spirit.

It was Straker, and he had been hung upside down like a pig in a slaughtering pen, his throat ripped wide open. His glazed eyes stared at them, through them, past them.

He had been bled white.


TWELVE

“Dear God,” Father Callahan said. “Dear God.”

They advanced slowly into the room, Callahan and Cody a bit in the lead, Ben and Mark behind, pressed together.

Straker’s feet had been bound together; then he had been hauled up and tied there. It occurred to Ben in a distant part of his brain that it must have taken a man with enormous strength to haul Straker’s dead weight up to a point where his dangling hands did not quite touch the floor.

Jimmy touched the forehead with his inner wrist, then held one of the dead hands in his own. “He’s been dead for maybe eighteen hours,” he said. He dropped the hand with a shudder. “My God, what an awful way to…I can’t figure this out. Why—who—”

“Barlow did it,” Mark said. He looked at Straker’s corpse with unflinching eyes.

“And Straker screwed up,” Jimmy said. “No eternal life for him. But why like this? Hung upside down?”

“It’s as old as Macedonia,” Father Callahan said. “Hanging the body of your enemy or betrayer upside down so his head faces earth instead of heaven. St Paul was crucified that way, on an X-shaped cross with his legs broken.”

Ben spoke, and his voice sounded old and dusty in his throat. “He’s still diverting us. He has a hundred tricks. Let’s go.”

They followed him back down the hall, back down the stairs, into the kitchen. Once there, he deferred to Father Callahan again. For a moment they just looked at each other, and then at the cellar door that led downward, just as twenty-five-odd years ago he had taken a set of stairs upward, to face an overwhelming question.


THIRTEEN

When the priest opened the door, Mark felt the rank, rotten odor assail his nostrils again—but that was also different. Not so strong. Less malevolent.

The priest started down the stairs. Still, it took all his willpower to continue down after Father Callahan into that pit of the dead.

Jimmy had produced a flashlight from his bag and clicked it on. The beam illuminated the floor, crossed to one wall, and swung back. It paused for a moment on a long crate, and then the beam fell on a table.

“There,” he said. “Look.”

It was an envelope, clean and shining in all this dingy darkness, a rich yellow vellum.

“It’s a trick,” Father Callahan said. “Better not touch it.”

“No,” Mark spoke up. He felt both relief and disappointment. “He’s not here. He’s gone. That’s for us. Full of mean things, probably.”

Ben stepped forward and picked the envelope up. He turned it over in his hands twice—Mark could see in the glow of Jimmy’s flashlight that his fingers were trembling—and then he tore it open.

There was one sheet inside, rich vellum like the envelope, and they crowded around. Jimmy focused his flashlight on the page, which was closely written in an elegant, spider-thin hand. They read it together, Mark a little more slowly than the others.



October 4.

My Dear Young Friends,

How lovely of you to have stopped by!

I am never averse to company; it has been one of my great joys in a long and often lonely life. Had you come in the evening, I should have welcomed you in person with the greatest of pleasure. However, since I suspected you might choose to arrive during daylight hours, I thought it best to be out.

I have left you a small token of my appreciation; someone very near and dear to one of you is now in the place where I occupied my days until I decided that other quarters might be more congenial. She is very lovely, Mr Mears—very toothsome, if I may be permitted a small bon mot. I have no further need of her and so I have left her for you to—how is your idiom?—to warm up for the main event. To whet your appetites, if you like. Let us see how well you like the appetizer to the main course you contemplate, shall we?

Master Petrie, you have robbed me of the most faithful and resourceful servant I have ever known. You have caused me, in an indirect fashion, to take part in his ruination; have caused my own appetites to betray me. You sneaked up behind him, doubtless. I am going to enjoy dealing with you. Your parents first, I think. Tonight…or tomorrow night…or the next. And then you. But you shall enter my church as choirboy castratum.

And Father Callahan—have they persuaded you to come? I thought so. I have observed you at some length since I arrived in Jerusalem’s Lot…much as a good chess player will study the games of his opposition, am I correct? The Catholic Church is not the oldest of my opponents, though! I was old when it was young, when its members hid in the catacombs of Rome and painted fishes on their chests so they could tell one from another. I was strong when this simpering club of bread-eaters and wine-drinkers who venerate the sheep-savior was weak. My rites were old when the rites of your church were unconceived. Yet I do not underestimate. I am wise in the ways of goodness as well as those of evil. I am not jaded.

And I will best you. How? you say. Does not Callahan bear the symbol of White? Does not Callahan move in the day as well as the night? Are there not charms and potions, both Christian and pagan, which my so-good friend Matthew Burke has informed me and my compatriots of? Yes, yes, and yes. But I have lived longer than you. I am crafty. I am not the serpent, but the father of serpents.

Still, you say, this is not enough. And it is not. In the end, “Father” Callahan, you will undo yourself. Your faith in the White is weak and soft. Your talk of love is presumption. Only when you speak of the bottle are you informed.

My good, good friends—Mr Mears; Mr Cody; Master Petrie; Father Callahan—enjoy your stay. The Médoc is excellent, procured for me especially by the late owner of this house, whose personal company I was never able to enjoy. Please be my guests if you still have a taste for wine after you have finished the work at hand. We will meet again, in person, and I shall convey my felicitations to each of you at that time in a more personal way.

Until then, adieu.


BARLOW.



Trembling, Ben let the letter fall to the table. He looked at the others. Mark stood with his hands clenched into fists, his mouth frozen in the twist of someone who has bitten something rotten; Jimmy, his oddly boyish face drawn and pale; Father Donald Callahan, his eyes alight, his mouth drawn down in a trembling bow.

And one by one, they looked up at him.

“Come on,” he said.

They went around the corner together.


FOURTEEN

Parkins Gillespie was standing on the front step of the brick Municipal Building, looking through his high-powered Zeiss binoculars when Nolly Gardener drove up in the town’s police car and got out, hitching up his belt and picking out his seat at the same time.

“What’s up, Park?” he asked, walking up the steps.

Parkins gave him the glasses wordlessly and flicked one callused thumb at the Marsten House.

Nolly looked. He saw that old Packard, and parked in front of it, a new tan Buick. The gain on the binoculars wasn’t quite high enough to pick off the plate number. He lowered his glasses. “That’s Doc Cody’s car, ain’t it?”

“Yes, I believe it is.” Parkins inserted a Pall Mall between his lips and scratched a kitchen match on the brick wall behind him.

“I never seen a car up there except that Packard.”

“Yes, that’s so,” Parkins said meditatively.

“Think we ought to go up there and have a look?” Nolly spoke with a marked lack of his usual enthusiasm. He had been a lawman for five years and was still entranced with his own position.

“No,” Parkins said, “I believe we’ll just leave her alone.” He took his watch out of his vest and clicked up the scrolled silver cover like a trainman checking an express. Just 3:41. He checked his watch against the clock on the town hall and then tucked it back into place.

“How’d all that come out with Floyd Tibbits and the little McDougall baby?” Nolly asked.

“Dunno.”

“Oh,” Nolly said, momentarily nonplussed. Parkins was always taciturn, but this was a new high for him. He looked through the glasses again: no change.

“Town seems quiet today,” Nolly volunteered.

“Yes,” Parkins said. He looked across Jointner Avenue and the park with his faded blue eyes. Both the avenue and the park were deserted. They had been deserted most of the day. There was a remarkable lack of mothers strolling babies or idlers around the War Memorial.

“Funny things been happening,” Nolly ventured.

“Yes,” Parkins said, considering.

As a last gasp, Nolly fell back on the one bit of conversational bait that Parkins had never failed to rise to: the weather. “Clouding up,” he said. “Be rain by tonight.”

Parkins studied the sky. There were mackerel scales directly overhead and a building bar of clouds to the southwest. “Yes,” he said, and threw the stub of his cigarette away.

“Park, you feelin’ all right?”

Parkins Gillespie considered it.

“Nope,” he said.

“Well, what in hell’s the matter?”

“I believe,” Gillespie said, “that I’m scared shitless.”

“What?” Nolly floundered. “Of what?”

“Dunno,” Parkins said, and took his binoculars back. He began to scan the Marsten House again while Nolly stood speechless beside him.


FIFTEEN

Beyond the table where the letter had been propped, the cellar made an L-turn, and they were now in what once had been a wine cellar. Hubert Marsten must have been a bootlegger indeed, Ben thought. There were small and medium casks covered with dust and cobwebs. One wall was covered with a crisscrossed wine rack, and ancient magnums still peered forth from some of the diamond-shaped pigeonholes. Some of them had exploded, and where sparkling burgundy had once waited for some discerning palate, the spider now made his home. Others had undoubtedly turned to vinegar; that sharp odor drifted in the air, mingled with that of slow corruption.

“No,” Ben said, speaking quietly, as a man speaks a fact. “I can’t.”

“You must,” Father Callahan said. “I’m not telling you it will be easy, or for the best. Only that you must.”

“I can’t!” Ben cried, and this time the words echoed in the cellar.

In the center, on a raised dais and spotlighted by Jimmy’s flashlight, Susan Norton lay still. She was covered from shoulders to feet in a drift of simple white linen, and when they reached her, none of them had been able to speak. Wonder had swallowed words.

In life she had been a cheerfully pretty girl who had missed the turn to beauty somewhere (perhaps by inches), not through any lack in her features but—just possibly—because her life had been so calm and unremarkable. But now she had achieved beauty. Dark beauty.

Death had not put its mark on her. Her face was blushed with color, and her lips, innocent of makeup, were a deep and glowing red. Her forehead was pale but flawless, the skin like cream. Her eyes were closed, and the dark lashes lay sootily against her cheeks. One hand was curled at her side, and the other was thrown lightly across her waist. Yet the total impression was not of angelic loveliness but a cold, disconnected beauty. Something in her face—not stated but hinted at—made Jimmy think of the young Saigon girls, some not yet thirteen, who would kneel before soldiers in the alleys behind the bars, not for the first time or the hundredth. Yet with those girls, the corruption hadn’t been evil but only a knowledge of the world that had come too soon. The change in Susan’s face was quite different—but he could not have said just how.

Now Callahan stepped forward and pressed his fingers against the springiness of her left breast. “Here,” he said. “The heart.”

“No,” Ben repeated. “I can’t.”

“Be her lover,” Father Callahan said softly. “Better, be her husband. You won’t hurt her, Ben. You’ll free her. The only one hurt will be you.”

Ben looked at him dumbly. Mark had taken the stake from Jimmy’s black bag and held it out wordlessly. Ben took it in a hand that seemed to stretch out for miles.

If I don’t think about it when I do it, then maybe—

But it would be impossible not to think about it. And suddenly a line came to him from Dracula, that amusing bit of fiction that no longer amused him in the slightest. It was Van Helsing’s speech to Arthur Holmwood when Arthur had been faced with this same dreadful task: We must go through bitter waters before we reach the sweet.

Could there be sweetness for any of them, ever again?

“Take it away!” he groaned. “Don’t make me do this—”

No answer.

He felt a cold, sick sweat spring out on his brow, his cheeks, his forearms. The stake that had been a simple baseball bat four hours before seemed infused with eerie heaviness, as if invisible yet titanic lines of force had converged on it.

He lifted the stake and pressed it against her left breast, just above the last fastened button of her blouse. The point made a dimple in her flesh, and he felt the side of his mouth begin to twitch in an uncontrollable tic.

“She’s not dead,” he said. His voice was hoarse and thick. It was his last line of defense.

“No,” Jimmy said implacably. “She’s Undead, Ben.” He had shown them; had wrapped the blood-pressure cuff around her still arm and pumped it. The reading had been 00/00. He had put his stethoscope on her chest, and each of them had listened to the silence inside her.

Something was put into Ben’s other hand—years later he still did not remember which of them had put it there. The hammer. The Craftsman hammer with the rubber perforated grip. The head glimmered in the flashlight’s glow.

“Do it quickly,” Callahan said, “and go out into the daylight. We’ll do the rest.”

We must go through bitter waters before we reach the sweet.

“God forgive me,” Ben whispered.

He raised the hammer and brought it down.

The hammer struck the top of the stake squarely, and the gelatinous tremor that vibrated up the length of ash would haunt him forever in his dreams. Her eyes flew open, wide and blue, as if from the very force of the blow. Blood gushed upward from the stake’s point of entry in a bright and astonishing flood, splashing his hands, his shirt, his cheeks. In an instant the cellar was filled with its hot, coppery odor.

She writhed on the table. Her hands came up and beat madly at the air like birds. Her feet thumped an aimless, rattling tattoo on the wood of the platform. Her mouth yawned open, revealing shocking, wolflike fangs, and she began to peal forth shriek after shriek, like hell’s clarion. Blood gushed from the corners of her mouth in freshets.

The hammer rose and fell: again…again…again.

Ben’s brain was filled with the shrieks of large black crows. It whirled with awful, unremembered images. His hands were scarlet, the stake was scarlet, the remorselessly rising and falling hammer was scarlet. In Jimmy’s trembling hands the flashlight became stroboscopic, illuminating Susan’s crazed, lashing face in spurts and flashes. Her teeth sheared through the flesh of her lips, tearing them to ribbons. Blood splattered across the fresh linen sheet which Jimmy had so neatly turned back, making patterns like Chinese ideograms.

And then, suddenly, her back arched like a bow, and her mouth stretched open until it seemed her jaws must break. A huge explosion of darker blood issued forth from the wound the stake had made—almost black in this chancy, lunatic light: heart’s blood. The scream that welled from the sounding chamber of that gaping mouth came from all the subcellars of deepest race memory and beyond that, to the moist darknesses of the human soul. Blood suddenly boiled from her mouth and nose in a tide…and something else. In the faint light it was only a suggestion, a shadow, of something leaping up and out, cheated and ruined. It merged with the darkness and was gone.

She settled back, her mouth relaxing, closing. The mangled lips parted in a last, susurrating pulse of air. For a moment the eyelids fluttered and Ben saw, or fancied he saw, the Susan he had met in the park, reading his book.

It was done.

He backed away, dropping the hammer, holding his hands out before him, a terrified conductor whose symphony has run riot.

Callahan put a hand on his shoulder. “Ben—”

He fled.

He stumbled going up the stairs, fell, and crawled toward the light at the top. Childhood horror and adult horror had merged. If he looked over his shoulder, he would see Hubie Marsten (or perhaps Straker) only a hand’s breadth behind, grinning out of his puffed and greenish face, the rope embedded deep into his neck—the grin revealing fangs instead of teeth. He screamed once, miserably.

Dimly, he heard Callahan cry out, “No, let him go—”

He burst through the kitchen and out the back door. The back porch steps were gone under his feet and he pitched headlong into the dirt. He got to his knees, crawled, got to his feet, and cast a glance behind him.

Nothing.

The house loomed without purpose, the last of its evil stolen away. It was just a house again.

Ben Mears stood in the great silence of the weed-choked backyard, his head thrown back, breathing in great white snuffles of air.


SIXTEEN

In the fall, night comes like this in the Lot:

The sun loses its thin grip on the air first, turning it cold, making it remember that winter is coming and winter will be long. Thin clouds form, and the shadows lengthen out. They have no breadth, as summer shadows have; there are no leaves on the trees or fat clouds in the sky to make them thick. They are gaunt, mean shadows that bite the ground like teeth.

As the sun nears the horizon, its benevolent yellow begins to deepen, to become infected, until it glares an angry inflamed orange. It throws a variegated glow over the horizon—a cloud-congested caul that is alternately red, orange, vermilion, purple. Sometimes the clouds break apart in great, slow rafts, letting through beams of innocent yellow sunlight that are bitterly nostalgic for the summer that has gone by.

This is six o’clock, the supper hour (in the Lot, dinner is eaten at noon and the lunch buckets that men grab from counters before going out the door are known as dinner pails). Mabel Werts, the unhealthy fat of old age hanging doughily on her bones, is sitting down to a broiled breast of chicken and a cup of Lipton tea, the phone by her elbow. In Eva’s the men are getting together whatever they have to get together: TV dinners, canned corned beef, canned beans which are woefully unlike the beans their mothers used to bake all Saturday morning and afternoon years ago, spaghetti dinners, or reheated hamburgers picked up at the Falmouth McDonald’s on the way home from work. Eva sits at the table in the front room, irritably playing gin rummy with Grover Verrill, and snapping at the others to wipe up their grease and to stop that damn slopping around. They cannot remember ever having seen her this way, cat-nervous and feisty. But they know what the matter is, even if she does not.

Mr and Mrs Petrie eat sandwiches in their kitchen, trying to puzzle out the call they have just received, a call from the local Catholic priest, Father Callahan: Your son is with me. He’s fine. I will have him home shortly. Good-by. They have debated calling the local lawman, Parkins Gillespie, and have decided to wait a bit longer. They have sensed some sort of change in their son, who has always been what his mother likes to call A Deep One. Yet the specters of Ralphie and Danny Glick hang over them, unacknowledged.

Milt Crossen is having bread and milk in the back of his store. He has had damned little appetite since his wife died back in ’68. Delbert Markey, proprietor of Dell’s, is working his way methodically through the five hamburgers which he has fried himself on the grill. He eats them with mustard and heaps of raw onions, and will complain most of the night to anyone who will listen that his goddamn acid indigestion is killing him. Father Callahan’s housekeeper, Rhoda Curless, eats nothing. She is worried about the Father, who is out someplace ramming the roads. Harriet Durham and her family are eating pork chops. Carl Smith, a widower since 1957, has one boiled potato and a bottle of Moxie. The Derek Boddins are having an Armour Star ham and brussels sprouts. Yechhh, says Richie Boddin, the deposed bully. Brussels sprouts. You eat ’em or I’ll clout your ass backward, Derek says. He hates them himself.

Reggie and Bonnie Sawyer are having a rib roast of beef, frozen corn, french-fried potatoes, and for dessert a chocolate bread pudding with hard sauce. These are all Reggie’s favorites. Bonnie, her bruises just beginning to fade, serves silently with downcast eyes. Reggie eats with steady, serious attention, killing three cans of Bud with the meal. Bonnie eats standing up. She is still too sore to sit down. She hasn’t much appetite, but she eats anyway, so Reggie won’t notice and say something. After he beat her up on that night, he flushed all her pills down the toilet and raped her. And has raped her every night since then.

By quarter of seven, most meals have been eaten, most after-dinner cigarettes and cigars and pipes smoked, most tables cleared. Dishes are being washed, rinsed, and stacked in drainers. Young children are being packed into Dr Dentons and sent into the other room to watch game shows on TV until bedtime.

Roy McDougall, who has burned the shit out of a fry pan full of veal steaks, curses and throws them—fry pan and all—into the swill. He puts on his denim jacket and sets out for Dell’s, leaving his goddamn good-for-nothing pig of a wife to sleep in the bedroom. Kid’s dead, wife’s slacking off, supper’s burned to hell. Time to get drunk. And maybe time to haul stakes and roll out of this two-bit town.

In a small upstairs flat on Taggart Street, which runs a short distance from Jointner Avenue to a dead end behind the Municipal Building, Joe Crane is given a left-handed gift from the gods. He has finished a small bowl of Shredded Wheat and is sitting down to watch the TV when he feels a large and sudden pain paralyze the left side of his chest and his left arm. He thinks: What’s this? Ticker? As it happens, this is exactly right. He gets up and makes it halfway to the telephone before the pain suddenly swells and drops him in his tracks like a steer hit with a hammer. His small color TV babbles on and on, and it will be twenty-four hours before anyone finds him. His death, which occurs at 6:51 pm, is the only natural death to occur in Jerusalem’s Lot on October 6.

By 7:00 the panoply of colors on the horizon has shrunk to a bitter orange line on the western horizon, as if furnace fires had been banked beyond the edge of the world. In the east the stars are already out. They gleam steadily, like fierce diamonds. There is no mercy in them at this time of year, no comfort for lovers. They gleam in beautiful indifference.

For the small children, bedtime is come. Time for the babies to be packed into their beds and cribs by parents who smile at their cries to be let up a little longer, to leave the light on. They indulgently open closet doors to show there is nothing in there.

And all around them, the bestiality of the night rises on tenebrous wings. The vampire’s time has come.


SEVENTEEN

Matt was dozing lightly when Jimmy and Ben came in, and he snapped awake almost immediately, his hand tightening on the cross he held in his right hand.

His eyes touched Jimmy’s, moved to Ben’s…and lingered.

“What happened?”

Jimmy told him briefly. Ben said nothing.

“Her body?”

“Callahan and I put it facedown in a crate that was down cellar, maybe the same crate Barlow came to town in. We threw it into the Royal River not an hour ago. Filled the box with stones. We used Straker’s car. If anyone noticed it by the bridge, they’ll think of him.”

“You did well. Where’s Callahan? And the boy?”

“Gone to Mark’s house. His parents have to be told everything. Barlow threatened them specifically.”

“Will they believe?”

“If they don’t, Mark will have his father call you.”

Matt nodded. He looked very tired.

“And Ben,” he said. “Come here. Sit on my bed.”

Ben came obediently, his face blank and dazed. He sat down and folded his hands neatly in his lap. His eyes were burned cigarette holes.

“There’s no comfort for you,” Matt said. He took one of Ben’s hands in his own. Ben let him, unprotesting. “It doesn’t matter. Time will comfort you. She is at rest.”

“He played us for fools,” Ben said hollowly. “He mocked us, each in turn. Jimmy, give him the letter.”

Jimmy gave Matt the envelope. He stripped the heavy sheet of stationery from the envelope and read it carefully, holding the paper only inches from his nose. His lips moved slightly. He put it down and said, “Yes. It is him. His ego is larger than even I imagined. It makes me want to shiver.”

“He left her for a joke,” Ben said hollowly. “He was gone, long before. Fighting him is like fighting the wind. We must seem like bugs to him. Little bugs scurrying around for his amusement.”

Jimmy opened his mouth to speak, but Matt shook his head slightly.

“That is far from the truth,” he said. “If he could have taken Susan with him, he would have. He wouldn’t give up his Undead just for jokes when there are so few of them! Step back a minute, Ben, and consider what you’ve done to him. Killed his familiar, Straker. By his own admission, even forced him to participate in the murder by reason of his insatiable appetite! How it must have terrified him to wake from his dreamless sleep and find that a young boy, unarmed, had slain such a fearsome creature.”

He sat up in bed with some difficulty. Ben had turned his head and was looking at him with the first interest he had shown since the others had come out of the house to find him in the backyard.

“Maybe that’s not the greatest victory,” Matt mused. “You’ve driven him from his house, his chosen home. Jimmy said that Father Callahan sterilized the cellar with holy water and has sealed all the doors with the Host. If he goes there again, he’ll die…and he knows it.”

“But he got away,” Ben said. “What does it matter?”

“He got away,” Matt echoed softly. “And where did he sleep today? In the trunk of a car? In the cellar of one of his victims? Perhaps in the basement of the old Methodist Church in the Marshes which burned down in the fire of ’51? Wherever it was, do you think he liked it, or felt safe there?”

Ben didn’t answer.

“Tomorrow, you’ll begin to hunt,” Matt said, and his hands tightened over Ben’s. “Not just for Barlow, but for all the little fish—and there will be a great many little fish after tonight. Their hunger is never satisfied. They’ll eat until they’re glutted. The nights are his, but in the daytime you will hound him and hound him until he takes fright and flees or until you drag him, staked and screaming, into the sunlight!”

Ben’s head had come up at this speech. His face had taken on an animation that was close to ghastly. Now a small smile touched his mouth. “Yes, that’s good,” he whispered. “Only tonight instead of tomorrow. Right now—”

Matt’s hand shot out and clutched Ben’s shoulder with surprising, sinewy strength. “Not tonight. Tonight we’re going to spend together—you and I and Jimmy and Father Callahan and Mark and Mark’s parents. He knows now…he’s afraid. Only a madman or a saint would dare to approach Barlow when he is awake in his mother-night. And none of us are either.” He closed his eyes and said softly, “I’m beginning to know him, I think. I lie in this hospital bed and play Mycroft Holmes, trying to outguess him by putting myself in his place. He has lived for centuries, and he is brilliant. But he is also an egocentric, as his letter shows. Why not? His ego has grown the way a pearl does, layer by layer, until it is huge and poisonous. He’s filled with pride. It must be vaunting indeed. And his thirst for revenge must be overmastering, a thing to be trembled at, but perhaps also a thing to be used.”

He opened his eyes and looked solemnly at them both. He raised the cross before him. “This will stop him, but it may not stop someone he can use, the way he used Floyd Tibbits. I think he may try to eliminate some of us tonight…some of us or all of us.”

He looked at Jimmy.

“I think bad judgment was used in sending Mark and Father Callahan to the house of Mark’s parents. They could have been called from here and summoned, knowing nothing. Now we are split…and I am especially worried for the boy. Jimmy, you had better call them…call them now.”

“All right.” He got up.

Matt looked at Ben. “And you will stay with us? Fight with us?”

“Yes,” Ben said hoarsely. “Yes.”

Jimmy left the room, went down the hall to the nurses’ station, and found the Petries’ number in the book. He dialed it rapidly and listened with sick horror as the sirening sound of a line out of service came through the earpiece instead of a ringing tone.

“He’s got them,” he said.

The head nurse glanced up at the sound of his voice and was frightened by the look on his face.


EIGHTEEN

Henry Petrie was an educated man. He had a B.S. from Northeastern, a master’s from Massachusetts Tech, and a Ph.D. in economics. He had left a perfectly good junior college teaching position to take an administrative post with the Prudential Insurance Company, as much out of curiosity as from any hope of monetary gain. He had wanted to see if certain of his economic ideas worked out as well in practice as they did in theory. They did. By the following summer, he hoped to be able to take the CPA test, and two years after that, the bar examination. His current goal was to begin the 1980s in a high federal government economics post. His son’s fey streak had not come from Henry Petrie; his father’s logic was complete and seamless, and his world was machined to a point of almost total precision. He was a registered Democrat who had voted for Nixon in the 1972 elections not because he believed Nixon was honest—he had told his wife many times that he considered Richard Nixon to be an unimaginative little crook with all the finesse of a shoplifter in Woolworth’s—but because the opposition was a crack-brained sky pilot who would bring down economic ruin on the country. He had viewed the counterculture of the late sixties with calm tolerance born of the belief that it would collapse harmlessly because it had no monetary base upon which to stand. His love for his wife and son was not beautiful—no one would ever write a poem to the passion of a man who balled his socks before his wife—but it was sturdy and unswerving. He was a straight arrow, confident in himself and in the natural laws of physics, mathematics, economics, and (to a slightly lesser degree) sociology.

He listened to the story told by his son and the village abbé, sipping a cup of coffee and prompting them with lucid questions at points where the thread of narration became tangled or unclear. His calmness increased, it seemed, in direct ratio to the story’s grotesqueries and to his wife June’s growing agitation. When they had finished it was almost five minutes of seven. Henry Petrie spoke his verdict in four calm, considered syllables.

“Impossible.”

Mark sighed and looked at Callahan and said, “I told you.” He had told him, as they drove over from the rectory in Callahan’s old car.

“Henry, don’t you think we—”

“Wait.”

That and his hand held up (almost casually) stilled her at once. She sat down and put her arm around Mark, pulling him slightly away from Callahan’s side. The boy submitted.

Henry Petrie looked at Father Callahan pleasantly. “Let’s see if we can’t work this delusion or whatever it is out like two reasonable men.”

“That may be impossible,” Callahan said with equal pleasantness, “but we’ll certainly try. We are here, Mr Petrie, specifically because Barlow has threatened you and your wife.”

“Did you actually pound a stake through that girl’s body this afternoon?”

“I did not. Mr Mears did.”

“Is the corpse still there?”

“They threw it in the river.”

“If that much is true,” Petrie said, “you have involved my son in a crime. Are you aware of that?”

“I am. It was necessary. Mr Petrie, if you’ll simply call Matt Burke’s hospital room—”

“Oh, I’m sure your witnesses will back you up,” Petrie said, still smiling that faint, maddening smile. “That’s one of the fascinating things about this lunacy. May I see the letter this Barlow left you?”

Callahan cursed mentally. “Dr Cody has it.” He added as an afterthought: “We really ought to ride over to the Cumberland Hospital. If you talk to—”

Petrie was shaking his head.

“Let’s talk a little more first. I’m sure your witnesses are reliable, as I’ve indicated. Dr Cody is our family physician, and we all like him very much. I’ve also been given to understand that Matthew Burke is above reproach…as a teacher, at least.”

“But in spite of that?” Callahan asked.

“Father Callahan, let me put it to you. If a dozen reliable witnesses told you that a giant ladybug had lumbered through the town park at high noon singing ‘Sweet Adeline’ and waving a Confederate flag, would you believe it?”

“If I was sure the witnesses were reliable, and if I was sure they weren’t joking, I would be far down the road to belief, yes.”

Still with the faint smile, Petrie said, “That is where we differ.”

“Your mind is closed,” Callahan said.

“No—simply made up.”

“It amounts to the same thing. Tell me, in the company you work for do they approve of executives making decisions on the basis of internal beliefs rather than external facts? That’s not logic, Petrie; that’s cant.”

Petrie stopped smiling and stood up. “Your story is disturbing, I’ll grant you that. You’ve involved my son in something deranged, possibly dangerous. You’ll all be lucky if you don’t stand in court for it. I’m going to call your people and talk to them. Then I think we had all better go to Mr Burke’s hospital room and discuss the matter further.”

“How good of you to bend a principle,” Callahan said dryly.

Petrie went into the living room and picked up the telephone. There was no answering open hum; the line was bare and silent. Frowning slightly, he jiggled the cut-off buttons. No response. He set the phone in its cradle and went back to the kitchen.

“The phone seems to be out of order,” he said.

He saw the instant look of fearful understanding that passed between Callahan and his son, and was irritated by it.

“I can assure you,” he said a little more sharply than he had intended, “that the Jerusalem’s Lot telephone service needs no vampires to disrupt it.”

The lights went out.


NINETEEN

Jimmy ran back to Matt’s room.

“The line’s out at the Petrie house. I think he’s there. Goddamn, we were so stupid—”

Ben got off the bed. Matt’s face seemed to squeeze and crumple. “You see how he works?” he muttered. “How smoothly? If only we had another hour of daylight, we could but we don’t. It’s done.”

“We have to go out there,” Jimmy said.

“No! You must not! For fear of your lives and mine, you must not.”

“But they—”

“They are on their own! What is happening—or has happened—will be done by the time you get out there!”

They stood near the door, indecisive.

Matt struggled, gathered his strength, and spoke to them quietly but with force.

“His ego is great, and his pride is great. These might be flaws we can put to our use. But his mind is also great, and we must respect it and allow for it. You showed me his letter—he speaks of chess. I’ve no doubt he’s a superb player. Don’t you realize that he could have done his work at that house without cutting the telephone line? He did it because he wants you to know one of white’s pieces is in check! He understands forces, and he understands that it becomes easier to conquer if the forces are split and in confusion. You gave him the first move by default because you forgot that—the original group was split in two. If you go haring off to the Petries’ house, the group is split in three. I’m alone and bedridden; easy game in spite of crosses and books and incantations. All he needs to do is send one of his almost-Undead here to kill me with a gun or a knife. And that leaves only you and Ben, rushing pell-mell through the night to your own doom. Then ’salem’s Lot is his. Don’t you see it?”

Ben spoke first. “Yes,” he said.

Matt slumped back. “I’m not speaking out of fear for my life, Ben. You have to believe that. Not even for fear of your lives. I’m afraid for the town. No matter what else happens, someone must be left to stop him tomorrow.”

“Yes. And he’s not going to have me until I’ve had revenge for Susan.”

A silence fell among them.

Jimmy Cody broke it. “They may get away anyway,” he said meditatively. “I think he’s underestimated Callahan, and I know damned well he’s underestimated the boy. That kid is one cool customer.”

“We’ll hope,” Matt said, and closed his eyes.

They settled down to wait.


TWENTY

Father Donald Callahan stood on one side of the spacious Petrie kitchen, holding his mother’s cross high above his head, and it spilled its ghostly effulgence across the room. Barlow stood on the other side, near the sink, one hand pinning Mark’s hands behind his back, the other slung around his neck. Between them, Henry and June Petrie lay sprawled on the floor in the shattered glass of Barlow’s entry.

Callahan was dazed. It had all happened with such swiftness that he could not take it in. At one moment he had been discussing the matter rationally (if maddeningly) with Petrie, under the brisk, no-nonsense glow of the kitchen lights. At the next, he had been plunged into the insanity that Mark’s father had denied with such calm and understanding firmness.

His mind tried to reconstruct what had happened.

Petrie had come back and told them the phone was out. Moments later they had lost the lights. June Petrie screamed. A chair fell over. For several moments all of them had stumbled around in the new dark, calling out to each other. Then the window over the sink had crashed inward, spraying glass across the kitchen counter and onto the linoleum floor. All this had happened in a space of thirty seconds.

Then a shadow had moved in the kitchen, and Callahan had broken the spell that held him. He clutched at the cross that hung around his neck, and even as his flesh touched it, the room was lit with its unearthly light.

He saw Mark, trying to drag his mother toward the arch which led into the living room. Henry Petrie stood beside them, his head turned, his calm face suddenly slack-jawed with amazement at this totally illogical invasion. And behind him, looming over them, a white, grinning face like something out of a Frazetta painting, which split to reveal long, sharp fangs—and red, lurid eyes like furnace doors to hell. Barlow’s hands flew out (Callahan had just time to see how long and sensitive those livid fingers were, like a concert pianist’s) and then he had seized Henry Petrie’s head in one hand, June’s in the other, and had brought them together with a grinding, sickening crack. They had both dropped down like stones, and Barlow’s first threat had been carried out.

Mark had uttered a high, keening scream and threw himself at Barlow without thought.

“And here you are!” Barlow had boomed good-naturedly in his rich, powerful voice. Mark attacked without thought and was captured instantly.

Callahan moved forward, holding his cross up.

Barlow’s grin of triumph was instantly transformed into a rictus of agony. He fell back toward the sink, dragging the boy in front of him. Their feet crunched in the broken glass.

“In God’s name—” Callahan began.

At the name of the Deity, Barlow screamed aloud as if he had been struck by a whip, his mouth open in a downward grimace, the needle fangs glimmering within. The cords of muscle on his neck stood out in stark, etched relief. “No closer!” he said. “No closer, shaman! Or I sever the boy’s jugular and carotid before you can draw a breath!” As he spoke, his upper lip lifted from those long, needlelike teeth, and as he finished, his head made a predatory downward pass with adder’s speed, missing Mark’s flesh by a quarter-inch.

Callahan stopped.

“Back up,” Barlow commanded, now grinning again. “You on your side of the board and I on mine, eh?”

Callahan backed up slowly, still holding the cross before him at eye level, so that he looked over its arms. The cross seemed to thrum with chained fire, and its power coursed up his forearm until the muscles bunched and trembled.

They faced each other.

“Together at last!” Barlow said, smiling. His face was strong and intelligent and handsome in a sharp, forbidding sort of way—yet, as the light shifted, it seemed almost effeminate. Where had he seen a face like that before? And it came to him, in this moment of the most extreme terror he had ever known. It was the face of Mr Flip, his own personal bogeyman, the thing that hid in the closet during the days and came out after his mother closed the bedroom door. He was not allowed a night-light—both his mother and his father had agreed that the way to conquer these childish fears was to face them, not toady to them—and every night, when the door snicked shut and his mother’s footsteps padded off down the hall, the closet door slid open a crack and he could sense (or actually see? ) the thin white face and burning eyes of Mr Flip. And here he was again, out of the closet, staring over Mark’s shoulder with his clown-white face and glowing eyes and red, sensual lips.

“What now?” Callahan said, and his voice was not his own at all. He was looking at Barlow’s fingers, those long, sensitive fingers, which lay against the boy’s throat. There were small blue blotches on them.

“That depends. What will you give for this miserable wretch?” He suddenly jerked Mark’s wrists high behind his back, obviously hoping to punctuate his question with a scream, but Mark would not oblige. Except for the sudden whistle of air between his set teeth, he was silent.

“You’ll scream,” Barlow whispered, and his lips had twisted into a grimace of animal hate. “You’ll scream until your throat bursts!”

“Stop that!” Callahan cried.

“And should I?” The hate was wiped from his face. A darkly charming smile shone forth in its place. “Should I reprieve the boy, save him for another night?”

“Yes!”

Softly, almost purring, Barlow said, “Then will you throw away your cross and face me on even terms—black against white? Your faith against my own?”

“Yes,” Callahan said, but a trifle less firmly.

“Then do it!” Those full lips became pursed, anticipatory. The high forehead gleamed in the weird fairy light that filled the room.

“And trust you to let him go? I would be wiser to put a rattlesnake in my shirt and trust it not to bite me.”

“But I trust you…look!”

He let Mark go and stood back, both hands in the air, empty.

Mark stood still, unbelieving for a moment, and then ran to his parents without a backward look at Barlow.

“Run, Mark!” Callahan cried. “Run!”

Mark looked up at him, his eyes huge and dark. “I think they’re dead—”

“RUN!”

Mark got slowly to his feet. He turned around and looked at Barlow.

“Soon, little brother,” Barlow said, almost benignly. “Very soon now you and I will—”

Mark spit in his face.

Barlow’s breath stopped. His brow darkened with a depth of fury that made his previous expressions seem like what they might well have been: mere playacting. For a moment Callahan saw a madness in his eyes blacker than the soul of murder.

“You spit on me,” Barlow whispered. His body was trembling, nearly rocking with his rage. He took a shuddering step forward like some awful blind man.

“Get back!” Callahan screamed, and thrust the cross forward.

Barlow cried out and threw his hands in front of his face. The cross flared with preternatural, dazzling brilliance, and it was at that moment that Callahan might have banished him if he had dared to press forward.

“I’m going to kill you,” Mark said.

He was gone, like a dark eddy of water.

Barlow seemed to grow taller. His hair, swept back from his brow in the European manner, seemed to float around his skull. He was wearing a dark suit and a wine-colored tie, impeccably knotted, and to Callahan he seemed part and parcel of the darkness that surrounded him. His eyes glared out of their sockets like sly and sullen embers.

“Then fulfill your part of the bargain, shaman.”

“I’m a priest!” Callahan flung at him.

Barlow made a small, mocking bow. “Priest,” he said, and the word sounded like a dead haddock in his mouth.

Callahan stood indecisive. Why throw it down? Drive him off, settle for a draw tonight, and tomorrow—

But a deeper part of his mind warned. To deny the vampire’s challenge was to risk possibilities far graver than any he had considered. If he dared not throw the cross aside, it would be as much as admitting…admitting…what? If only things weren’t going so fast, if one only had time to think, to reason it out—

The cross’s glow was dying.

He looked at it, eyes widening. Fear leaped into his belly like a confusion of hot wires. His head jerked up and he stared at Barlow. He was walking toward him across the kitchen and his smile was wide, almost voluptuous.

“Stay back,” Callahan said hoarsely, retreating a step. “I command it, in the name of God.”

Barlow laughed at him.

The glow in the cross was only a thin and guttering light in a cruciform shape. The shadows had crept across the vampire’s face again, masking his features in strangely barbaric lines and triangles under the sharp cheekbones.

Callahan took another step backward, and his buttocks bumped the kitchen table, which was set against the wall.

“Nowhere left to go,” Barlow murmured sadly. His dark eyes bubbled with infernal mirth. “Sad to see a man’s faith fail. Ah, well…”

The cross trembled in Callahan’s hand and suddenly the last of its light vanished. It was only a piece of plaster that his mother had bought in a Dublin souvenir shop, probably at a scalper’s price. The power it had sent ramming up his arm, enough power to smash down walls and shatter stone, was gone. The muscles remembered the thrumming but could not duplicate it.

Barlow reached from the darkness and plucked the cross from his fingers. Callahan cried out miserably, the cry that had vibrated in the soul—but never the throat—of that long-ago child who had been left alone each night with Mr Flip peering out of the closet at him from between the shutters of sleep. And the next sound would haunt him for the rest of his life: two dry snaps as Barlow broke the arms of the cross, and a meaningless thump as he threw it on the floor.

“God damn you!” he cried out.

“It’s too late for such melodrama,” Barlow said from the darkness. His voice was almost sorrowful. “There is no need of it. You have forgotten the doctrine of your own church, is it not so? The cross…the bread and wine…the confessional…only symbols. Without faith, the cross is only wood, the bread baked wheat, the wine sour grapes. If you had cast the cross away, you should have beaten me another night. In a way, I hoped it might be so. It has been long since I have met an opponent of any real worth. The boy makes ten of you, false priest.”

Suddenly, out of the darkness, hands of amazing strength gripped Callahan’s shoulders.

“You would welcome the oblivion of my death now, I think. There is no memory for the Undead; only the hunger and the need to serve the Master. I could make use of you. I could send you among your friends. Yet is there need of that? Without you to lead them, I think they are little. And the boy will tell them. One moves against them at this time. There is, perhaps, a more fitting punishment for you, false priest.”

He remembered Matt saying: Some things are worse than death.

He tried to struggle away, but the hands held him in a viselike grip. Then one hand left him. There was the sound of cloth moving across bare skin, and then a scraping sound.

The hands moved to his neck.

“Come, false priest. Learn of a true religion. Take my communion.”

Understanding washed over Callahan in a ghastly flood.

“No! Don’t…don’t—”

But the hands were implacable. His head was drawn forward, forward, forward.

“Now, priest,” Barlow whispered.

And Callahan’s mouth was pressed against the reeking flesh of the vampire’s cold throat, where an open vein pulsed. He held his breath for what seemed like aeons, twisting his head wildly and to no avail, smearing the blood across his cheeks and forehead and chin like war paint.

Yet at last, he drank.


TWENTY-ONE

Ann Norton got out of her car without bothering to take the keys, and began to walk across the hospital parking lot toward the bright lights of the lobby. Overhead, clouds had blotted out the stars and soon it would begin to rain. She didn’t look up to see the clouds. She walked stolidly, looking straight in front of her.

She was a very different-looking woman from the lady Ben Mears had met on that first evening Susan had invited him to take dinner with her family. That lady had been medium-tall, dressed in a green wool dress that did not scream of money but spoke of material comfort. That lady had not been beautiful but she had been well groomed and pleasant to look at; her graying hair had been permed not long since.

This woman wore only carpet slippers on her feet. Her legs were bare, and with no Supp-hose to mask them, the varicose veins bulged prominently (although not as prominently as before; some of the pressure had been taken off them). She was wearing a ragged yellow dressing gown over her negligee; her hair was blown in errant sheafs by the rising wind. Her face was pallid, and heavy brown circles lay beneath her eyes.

She had told Susan, had warned her about that man Mears and his friends, had warned her about the man who had murdered her. Matt Burke had put him up to it. They had been in cahoots. Oh yes. She knew. He had told her.

She had been sick all day, sick and sleepy and nearly unable to get out of bed. And when she had fallen into a heavy slumber after noon, while her husband was off answering questions for a silly missing persons report, he had come to her in a dream. His face was handsome and commanding and arrogant and compelling. His nose was hawklike, his hair swept back from his brow, and his heavy, fascinating mouth masked strangely exciting white teeth that showed when he smiled. And his eyes…they were red and hypnotic. When he looked at you with those eyes, you could not look away…and you didn’t want to.

He had told her everything, and what she must do—and how she could be with her daughter when it was done, and with so many others…and with him. Despite Susan, it was him she wanted to please, so he would give her the thing she craved and needed: the touch; the penetration.

Her husband’s .38 was in her pocket.

She entered the lobby and looked toward the reception desk. If anyone tried to stop her, she would take care of them. Not by shooting, no. No shot must be fired until she was in Burke’s room. He had told her so. If they got to her and stopped her before she had done the job, he would not come to her, to give her burning kisses in the night.

There was a young girl at the desk in a white cap and uniform, working a crossword in the soft glow of the lamp over her main console. An orderly was just going down the hall, his back to them.

The duty nurse looked up with a trained smile when she heard Ann’s footsteps, but it faded when she saw the hollow-eyed woman who was approaching her in nightclothes. Her eyes were blank yet oddly shiny, as if she were a wind-up toy someone had set in motion. A patient, perhaps, who had gone wandering.

“Ma’am, if you—”