“Didn’t she tell you about Bubba?”

“Bubba?”

“This vampire Bill left watching the house.”

“Oh. Yeah, she said he reminded her of some singer.”

“Well, his name is Bubba. He likes to drain animals for fun.”

I had the satisfaction of seeing (through my fingers) Sam turn pale.

“Well, isn’t it lucky you let me in, then,” he said finally.

Suddenly recalled to his guise of the night before, I said, “What are you, Sam?”

“I’m a shapeshifter. I thought it was time you knew.”

“Did you have to do it quite like that?”

“Actually,” he said, embarrassed, “I had planned on waking up and getting out before you opened your eyes. I just overslept. Running around on all fours kind of tires you out.”

“I thought people just changed into wolves.”

“Nope. I can change into anything.”

I was so interested I dropped my hands and tried to just stare at his face. “How often?” I asked. “Do you get to pick?”

“I have to at the full moon,” he explained. “Other times, I have to will it; it’s harder and it takes longer. I turn into whatever animal I saw before I changed. So I keep a dog book open to a picture of a collie on my coffee table. Collies are big, but nonthreatening.”

“So, you could be a bird?”

“Yeah, but flying is hard. I’m always scared I’m going to get fried on a power line, or fly into a window.”

“Why? Why did you want me to know?”

“You seemed to handle Bill being a vampire really well. In fact, you seemed to enjoy it. So I thought I would see if you could handle my . . . condition.”

“But what you are,” I said abruptly, off on a mental tangent, “can’t be explained by a virus! I mean, you utterly change!”

He didn’t say anything. He just looked at me, the eyes now blue, but just as intelligent and observant.

“Being a shapeshifter is definitely supernatural. If that is, then other things can be. So . . .” I said, slowly, carefully, “Bill hasn’t got a virus at all. Being a vampire, it really can’t be explained by an allergy to silver or garlic or sunlight . . . that’s just so much bullshit the vampires are spreading around, propaganda, you might say . . . so they can be more easily accepted, as sufferers from a terrible disease. But really they’re . . . they’re really . . .”

I dashed into the bathroom and threw up. Luckily, I made it to the toilet.

“Yeah,” Sam said from the doorway, his voice sad. “I’m sorry, Sookie. But Bill doesn’t just have a virus. He’s really, really dead.”




I WASHED MY face and brushed my teeth twice. I sat down on the edge of the bed, feeling too tired to go farther. Sam sat beside me. He put his arm around me comfortingly, and after a moment I nestled closer, laying my cheek in the hollow of his neck.

“You know, once I was listening to NPR,” I said, completely at random. “They were broadcasting a piece about cryogenics, about how lots of people are opting to just freeze their head because it’s so much cheaper than getting your whole body frozen.”

“Ummm?”

“Guess what song they played for the closing?”

“What, Sookie?”

“ ‘Put Your Head on My Shoulder.’ ”

Sam made a choking noise, then doubled over with laughter.

“Listen, Sam,” I said, when he’d calmed down. “I hear what you’re telling me, but I have to work this out with Bill. I love Bill. I am loyal to him. And he isn’t here to give his point of view.”

“Oh, this isn’t about me trying to woo you away from Bill. Though that would be great.” And Sam smiled his rare and brilliant smile. He seemed much more relaxed with me now that I knew his secret.

“Then what is it about?”

“This is about keeping you alive until the murderer is caught.”

“So that’s why you woke up naked in my bed? For my protection?”

He had the grace to look ashamed. “Well, maybe I could have planned it better. But I did think you needed someone with you, since Arlene told me Bill was out of town. I knew you wouldn’t let me spend the night here as a human.”

“Will you rest easy now that you know Bubba is watching the house at night?”

“Vampires are strong, and ferocious,” Sam conceded. “I guess this Bubba owes Bill something, or he wouldn’t be doing him a favor. Vampires aren’t big on doing each other favors. They have a lot of structure in their world.”

I should have paid more attention to what Sam was saying, but I was thinking I’d better not explain about Bubba’s origins.

“If there’s you, and Bill, I guess there must be lots of other things outside of nature,” I said, realizing what a treasure trove of thought awaited me. Since I’d met Bill, I hadn’t felt so much need to hoard neat things up for future contemplation, but it never hurt to be prepared. “You’ll have to tell me sometime.” Big Foot? The Loch Ness Monster? I’d always believed in the Loch Ness monster.

“Well, I guess I better be getting back home,” Sam said. He looked at me hopefully. He was still naked.

“Yes, I think you better. But—oh, dang it—you . . . oh, hell.” I stomped upstairs to look for some clothes. It seemed to me Jason had a couple of things in an upstairs closet he kept here for some emergency.

Sure enough, there was a pair of blue jeans and a work shirt in the first upstairs bedroom. It was already hot up there, under the tin roof, because the upstairs was on a separate thermostat. I came back down, grateful to feel the cool conditioned air.

“Here,” I said, handing Sam the clothes. “I hope they fit well enough.” He looked as though he wanted to start our conversation back up, but I was too aware now that I was clad in a thin nylon nightgown and he was clad in nothing at all.

“On with the clothes,” I said firmly. “And you get dressed out in the living room.” I shooed him out and shut the door behind him. I thought it would be insulting to lock the door, so I didn’t. I did get dressed in record time, pulling on clean underwear and the denim skirt and yellow shirt I’d had on the night before. I dabbed on my makeup, put on some earrings, and brushed my hair up into a ponytail, putting a yellow scrunchy over the elastic band. My morale rose as I looked in the mirror. My smile turned into a frown when I thought I heard a truck pulling into the front yard.

I came out of the bedroom like I’d been fired from a cannon, hoping like hell Sam was dressed and hiding. He’d done one better. He’d changed back into a dog. The clothes were scattered on the floor, and I swept them up and stuffed them into the closet in the hall.

“Good boy!” I said enthusiastically and scratched behind his ears. Dean responded by sticking his cold black nose up my skirt. “Now you cut that out,” I said, and looked through the front window. “It’s Andy Bellefleur,” I told the dog.

Andy jumped out of his Dodge Ram, stretched for a long second, and headed for my front door. I opened it, Dean by my side.

I eyed Andy quizzically. “You look like you been up all night long, Andy. Can I make you some coffee?”

The dog stirred restlessly beside me.

“That would be great,” he said. “Can I come in?”

“Sure.” I stood aside. Dean growled.

“You got a good guard dog, there. Here, fella. Come here.” Andy squatted to hold out a hand to the collie, whom I simply could not think of as Sam. Dean sniffed Andy’s hand, but wouldn’t give it a lick. Instead, he kept between me and Andy.

“Come on back to the kitchen,” I said, and Andy stood and followed me. I had the coffee on in a jiffy and put some bread in the toaster. Assembling the cream and sugar and spoons and mugs took a few more minutes, but then I had to face why Andy was here. His face was drawn; he looked ten years older than I knew him to be. This was no courtesy call.

“Sookie, were you here last night? You didn’t work?”

“No, I didn’t. I was here except for a quick trip in to Merlotte’s.”

“Was Bill here any of that time?”

“No, he’s in New Orleans. He’s staying in that new hotel in the French Quarter, the one just for vampires.”

“You’re sure that’s where he is.”

“Yes.” I could feel my face tighten. The bad thing was coming.

“I’ve been up all night,” Andy said.

“Yes.”

“I’ve just come from another crime scene.”

“Yes.” I went into his mind. “Amy Burley?” I stared at his eyes, trying to make sure. “Amy who worked at the Good Times Bar?” The name at the top of yesterday’s pile of prospective barmaids, the name I’d left for Sam. I looked down at the dog. He lay on the floor with his muzzle between his paws, looking as sad and stunned as I felt. He whined pathetically.

Andy’s brown eyes were boring a hole in me. “How’d you know?”

“Cut the crap, Andy, you know I can read minds. I feel awful. Poor Amy. Was it like the others?”

“Yes,” he said. “Yes, it was like the others. But the puncture marks were fresher.”

I thought of the night Bill and I had had to go to Shreveport to answer Eric’s summons. Had Amy given Bill blood that night? I couldn’t even count how many days ago that had been, my schedule had been so thrown off by all the strange and terrible events of the past few weeks.

I sat down heavily in a wooden kitchen chair, shaking my head absently for a few minutes, amazed at the turn my life had taken.

Amy Burley’s life had no more turns to take. I shook the odd spell of apathy off, rose and poured the coffee.

“Bill hasn’t been here since night before last,” I said.

“And you were here all night?”

“Yes, I was. My dog can tell you,” and I smiled down at Dean, who whined at being noticed. He came over to lay his fuzzy head on my knees while I drank my coffee. I smoothed his ears.

“Did you hear from your brother?”

“No, but I got a funny phone call, from someone who said he was at Merlotte’s.” After the words left my mouth I realized the caller must have been Sam, luring me over to Merlotte’s so he could maneuver himself into accompanying me home. Dean yawned, a big jaw-cracking yawn that let us see every one of his white sharp teeth.

I wished I’d kept my mouth shut.

But now I had to explain the whole thing to Andy, who was slumped only half-awake in my kitchen chair, his plaid shirt wrinkled and blotched with coffee stains, his khakis shapeless through long wear. Andy was longing for bed the way a horse longs for his own stall.

“You need to get some rest,” I said gently. There was something sad about Andy Bellefleur, something daunted.

“It’s these murders,” he said, his voice unsteady from exhaustion. “These poor women. And they were all the same in so many ways.”

“Uneducated, blue-collar women who worked in bars? Didn’t mind having a vampire lover from time to time?”

He nodded, his eyes drooping shut.

“Women just like me, in other words.”

His eyes opened then. He was aghast at his error. “Sookie . . .”

“I understand, Andy,” I said. “In some respects, we are all alike, and if you accept the attack on my grandmother as intended for me, well, I guess then I’m the only survivor.”

I wondered who the murderer had left to kill. Was I the only one alive who met his criteria? That was the scariest thought I’d had all day.

Andy was practically nodding over his coffee cup.

“Why don’t you go lie down in the other bedroom?” I suggested quietly. “You have to have some sleep. You’re not safe to drive, I wouldn’t think.”

“That’s kind of you,” Andy said, his voice dragging. He sounded a little surprised, like kindness wasn’t something he expected from me. “But I have to get home, set my alarm. I can sleep for maybe three hours.”

“I promise I’ll wake you up,” I said. I didn’t want Andy sleeping in my house, but I didn’t want him to have a wreck on the way to his house, either. Old Mrs. Bellefleur would never forgive me, and probably Portia wouldn’t, either. “You come lie down in this room.” I led him to my old bedroom. My single bed was neatly made up. “You just lie down on top of the bed, and I’ll set the alarm.” I did, while he watched. “Now, get a little sleep. I have one errand to run, and I’ll be right back.” Andy didn’t offer any more resistance, but sat heavily on the bed even as I shut the door.

The dog had been padding after me while I got Andy situated, and now I said to him, in a quite different tone, “You go get dressed right now!”

Andy stuck his head out the bedroom door. “Sookie, who are you talking to?”

“The dog,” I answered instantly. “He always gets his collar, and I put it on every day.”

“Why do you ever take it off?”

“It jingles at night, keeps me up. You go to bed, now.”

“All right.” Looking satisfied at my explanation, Andy shut the door again.

I retrieved Jason’s clothes from the closet, put them on the couch in front of the dog, and sat with my back turned. But I realized I could see in the mirror over the mantel.

The air grew hazy around the collie, seemed to hum and vibrate with energy, and then the form began to change within that electric concentration. When the haze cleared, there was Sam kneeling on the floor, buck-naked. Wow, what a bottom. I had to make myself close my eyes, tell myself repeatedly that I had not been unfaithful to Bill. Bill’s butt, I told myself staunchly, was every bit as neat.

“I’m ready,” Sam’s voice said, so close behind me that I jumped. I stood up quickly and turned to face him, and found his face about six inches from mine.

“Sookie,” he said hopefully, his hand landing on my shoulder, rubbing and caressing it.

I was angry because half of me wanted to respond.

“Listen here, buddy, you could have told me about yourself anytime in the past few years. We’ve known each other what, four years? Or even more! And yet, Sam, despite the fact that I see you almost daily, you wait until Bill is interested in me, before you even . . .” and unable to think how to finish, I threw my hands up in the air.

Sam drew back, which was a good thing.

“I didn’t see what was in front of me until I thought it might be taken away,” he said, his voice quiet.

I had nothing to say to that. “Time to go home,” I told him. “And we better get you there without anyone seeing you. I mean it.”

This was chancy enough without some mischievous person like Rene seeing Sam in my car in the early morning and drawing wrong conclusions. And passing them on to Bill.

So off we went, Sam hunched down in the backseat. I pulled cautiously behind Merlotte’s. There was a truck there; black, with pink and aqua flames down the sides. Jason’s.

“Uh-oh,” I said.

“What?” Sam’s voice was somewhat muffled by his position.

“Let me go look,” I said, beginning to be anxious. Why would Jason park over here in the employees’ parking area? And it seemed to me there was a shape in the truck.

I opened my door. I waited for the sound to alert the figure in the truck. I watched for evidence of movement. When nothing happened, I began to walk across the gravel, as frightened as I’d ever been in the light of day.

When I got closer to the window, I could see that the figure inside was Jason. He was slumped behind the wheel. I could see that his shirt was stained, that his chin was resting on his chest, that his hands were limp on the seat on either side of him, that the mark on his handsome face was a long red scratch. I could see a videotape resting on the truck dashboard, unlabelled.

“Sam,” I said, hating the fear in my voice. “Please come here.”

Quicker than I could believe, Sam was beside me, then reaching past me to unlatch the truck door. Since the truck had apparently been sitting there for several hours—there was dew on its hood—with the windows closed, in the early summer, the smell that rolled out was pretty strong and compounded of at least three elements: blood, sex, and liquor.

“Call the ambulance!” I said urgently as Sam reached in to feel for Jason’s pulse. Sam looked at me doubtfully. “Are you sure you want to do that?” he asked.

“Of course! He’s unconscious!”

“Wait, Sookie. Think about this.”

And I might have reconsidered in just a minute, but at that moment Arlene pulled up in her beat-up blue Ford, and Sam sighed and went into his trailer to phone.

I was so naive. That’s what comes of being a law-abiding citizen for nearly every day of my life.

I rode with Jason to the tiny local hospital, oblivious to the police looking very carefully at Jason’s truck, blind to the squad car following the ambulance, totally trusting when the emergency room doctor sent me home, telling me he’d call me when Jason regained consciousness. The doctor told me, eyeing me curiously, that Jason was apparently sleeping off the effects of alcohol or drugs. But Jason had never drunk that much before, and Jason didn’t use drugs: our cousin Hadley’s descent into the life of the streets had made a profound impression on both of us. I told the doctor all that, and he listened, and he shooed me off.

Not knowing what to think, I went home to find that Andy Bellefleur had been roused by his pager. He’d left me a note telling me that, and nothing else. Later on, I found that he’d actually been in the hospital while I was there, and waited until I was gone out of consideration for me before he’d hand-cuffed Jason to the bed.





12

SAM CAME TO GIVE ME THE NEWS ABOUT ELEVEN O’CLOCK. “They’re going to arrest Jason as soon as he comes to, Sookie, which looks to be soon.” Sam didn’t tell me how he came to know this, and I didn’t ask.

I stared at him, tears running down my face. Any other day, I might have thought of how plain I look when I cry, but today was not a day I cared about my outsides. I was all in a knot, frightened for Jason, sad about Amy Burley, full of anger the police were making such a stupid mistake, and underneath it all, missing my Bill.

“They think it looks like Amy Burley put up a fight. They think he got drunk after he killed her.”

“Thanks, Sam, for warning me.” My voice came from way faraway. “You better go to work, now.”

After Sam had seen that I needed to be alone, I called information and got the number of Blood in the Quarter. I punched in the numbers, feeling somehow I was doing a bad thing, but I couldn’t think how or why.

“Bloooooood . . . in the Quarter,” announced a deep voice dramatically. “Your coffin away from home.”

Geez. “Good morning. This is Sookie Stackhouse calling from Bon Temps,” I said politely. “I need to leave a message for Bill Compton. He’s a guest there.”

“Fang or human?”

“Ah . . . fang.”

“Just one minute, please.”

The deep voice came back on the line after a moment. “What is the message, madam?”

That gave me pause.

“Please tell Mr. Compton that . . . my brother has been arrested, and I would appreciate it if he could come home as soon as his business is completed.”

“I have that down.” The sound of scribbling. “And your name again?”

“Stackhouse. Sookie Stackhouse.”

“All right, miss. I’ll see to it that he gets your message.”

“Thanks.”

And that was the only action I could think of to take, until I realized it would be much more practical to call Sid Matt Lancaster. He did his best to sound appalled to hear Jason was going to be arrested, said he’d hurry over to the hospital as soon as he got out of court that afternoon, and that he’d report back to me.

I drove back to the hospital to see if they’d let me sit with Jason until he became conscious. They wouldn’t. I wondered if he was already conscious, and they weren’t telling me. I saw Andy Bellefleur at the other end of the hall, and he turned and walked the other way.

Damn coward.

I went home because I couldn’t think of anything to do. I realized it wasn’t a workday for me anyway, and that was a good thing, though I didn’t really care too much at that point. It occurred to me that I wasn’t handling this as well as I ought, that I had been much steadier when Gran had died.

But that had been a finite situation. We would bury Gran, her killer would be arrested, we would go on. If the police seriously believed that Jason had killed Gran in addition to the other women, then the world was such a bad and chancy place that I wanted no part of it.

But I realized, as I sat and looked in front of me that long, long afternoon, that it was naivete like that that had led to Jason’s arrest. If I’d just gotten him into Sam’s trailer and cleaned him up, hidden the film until I found out what it contained, above all not called the ambulance . . . that had been what Sam had been thinking when he’d looked at me so doubtfully. However, Arlene’s arrival had kind of wiped out my options.

I thought the phone would start ringing as soon as people heard.

But no one called.

They didn’t know what to say.

Sid Matt Lancaster came about four thirty.

Without any preliminary, he told me, “They’ve arrested him. For first-degree murder.”

I closed my eyes. When I opened them, Sid was regarding me with a shrewd expression on his mild face. His conservative black-framed glasses magnified his muddy brown eyes, and his jowls and sharp nose made him look a little like a bloodhound.

“What does he say?” I asked.

“He says that he was with Amy last night.”

I sighed.

“He says they went to bed together, that he had been with Amy before. He says he hadn’t seen Amy in a long time, that the last time they were together Amy was acting jealous about the other women he was seeing, really angry. So he was surprised when she approached him last night in Good Times. Jason says Amy acted funny all night, like she had an agenda he didn’t know about. He remembers having sex with her, he remembers them lying in bed having a drink afterward, then he remembers nothing until he woke up in the hospital.”

“He was set up,” I said firmly, thinking I sounded exactly like a bad made-for-TV movie.

“Of course.” Sid Matt’s eyes were as steady and assured as if he’d been at Amy Burley’s place last night.

Hell, maybe he had.

“Listen, Sid Matt.” I leaned forward and made him meet my eyes. “Even if I could somehow believe that Jason had killed Amy, and Dawn, and Maudette, I could never believe he would raise his finger to hurt my grandmother.”

“All right, then.” Sid Matt prepared to meet my thoughts, fair and square, his entire body proclaimed it. “Miss Sookie, let’s just assume for a minute that Jason did have some kind of involvement in those deaths. Perhaps, the police might think, your friend Bill Compton killed your grandmother since she was keeping you two apart.”

I tried to give the appearance of considering this piece of idiocy. “Well, Sid Matt, my grandmother liked Bill, and she was pleased I was seeing him.”

Until he put his game face back on, I saw stark disbelief in the lawyer’s eyes. He wouldn’t be at all happy if his daughter was seeing a vampire. He couldn’t imagine a responsible parent being anything but appalled. And he couldn’t imagine trying to convince a jury that my grandmother had been pleased I was dating a guy who wasn’t even alive, and furthermore was over a hundred years older than me.

Those were Sid Matt’s thoughts.

“Have you met Bill?” I asked.

He was taken aback. “No,” he admitted. “You know, Miss Sookie, I’m not for this vampire stuff. I think it’s taking a chink out of a wall we should keep built up, a wall between us and the so-called virus-infected. I think God intended that wall to be there, and I for one will hold up my section.”

“The problem with that, Sid Matt, is that I personally was created straddling that wall.” After a lifetime of keeping my mouth shut about my “gift,” I found that if it would help Jason, I’d shake it in anybody’s face.

“Well,” Sid Matt said bravely, pushing his glasses up on the bridge of his sharp nose, “I am sure the Good Lord gave you this problem I’ve heard about for a reason. You have to learn how to use it for his glory.”

No one had ever quite put it that way. That was an idea to chew over when I had time.

“I’ve made us stray from the subject, I’m afraid, and I know your time is valuable.” I gathered my thoughts. “I want Jason out on bail. There is nothing but circumstantial evidence tying him to Amy’s murder, am I right?”

“He’s admitted to being with the victim right before the murder, and the videotape, one of the cops hinted to me pretty strongly, shows your brother having sex with the victim. The time and date on the film indicate it was made in the hours before her death, if not minutes.”

Damn Jason’s peculiar bedroom preferences. “Jason doesn’t drink much at all. He smelled of liquor in the truck. I think it was just spilled over him. I think a test will prove that. Maybe Amy gave him some narcotic in the drink she fixed him.”

“Why would she do that?”

“Because, like so many women, she was mad at Jason because she wanted him so much. My brother is able to date almost anyone he wants. No, I’m using that euphemism.”

Sid Matt looked surprised I knew the word.

“He could go to bed with almost anyone he wanted. A dream life, most guys would think.” Weariness descended on me like fog. “Now there he sits in the jail.”

“You think another man did this to him? Framed him for this murder?”

“Yes, I do.” I leaned forward, trying to persuade this skeptical lawyer by the force of my own belief. “Someone envious of him. Someone who knows his schedule, who kills these women when Jason’s off work. Someone who knows Jason had had sex with these gals. Someone who knows he likes to make tapes.”

“Could be almost anyone,” Jason’s lawyer said practically.

“Yep,” I said sadly. “Even if Jason was nice enough to keep quiet about exactly who he’d been with, all anyone’d have to do is see who he left a bar with at closing time. Just being observant, maybe having asked about the tapes on a visit to his house . . .” My brother might be somewhat immoral, but I didn’t think he’d show those videos to anyone else. He might tell another man that he liked to make the videos, though. “So this man, whoever he is, made some kind of deal with Amy, knowing she was mad at Jason. Maybe he told her he was going to play a practical joke on Jason or something.”

“Your brother’s never been arrested before,” Sid Matt observed.

“No.” Though it had been a near thing, a couple of times, to hear Jason tell it.

“No record, upstanding member of the community, steady job. There may be a chance I can get him out on bail. But if he runs, you’ll lose everything.”

It truly had never occurred to me that Jason might skip bail. I didn’t know anything about arranging for bail, and I didn’t know what I’d have to do, but I wanted Jason out of that jail. Somehow, staying in jail until the legal processes had been gone through before the trial . . . somehow, that would make him look guiltier.

“You find out about it and let me know what I have to do,” I said. “In the meantime, can I go see him?”

“He’d rather you didn’t,” Sid Matt said.

That hurt dreadfully. “Why?” I asked, trying really hard not to tear up again.

“He’s ashamed,” said the lawyer.

The thought of Jason feeling shame was fascinating.

“So,” I said, trying to move along, suddenly tired of this unsatisfactory meeting. “You’ll call me when I can actually do something?”

Sid Matt nodded, his jowls trembling slightly with the movement. I made him uneasy. He sure was glad to be leaving me.

The lawyer drove off in his pickup, clapping a cowboy hat on his head when he was still in sight.

When it was full dark, I went out to check on Bubba. He was sitting under a pin oak, bottles of blood lined up beside him, empties on one side, fulls on the other.

I had a flashlight, and though I knew Bubba was there, it was still a shock to see him in the beam of light. I shook my head. Something really had gone wrong when Bubba “came over,” no doubt about it. I was sincerely glad I couldn’t read Bubba’s thoughts. His eyes were crazy as hell.

“Hey, sugar,” he said, his Southern accent as thick as syrup. “How you doing? You come to keep me company?”

“I just wanted to make sure you were comfortable,” I said.

“Well, I could think of places I’d be more comfortable, but since you’re Bill’s girl, I ain’t about to talk about them.”

“Good,” I said firmly.

“Any cats around here? I’m getting mighty tired of this bottled stuff.”

“No cats. I’m sure Bill will be back soon, and then you can go home.” I started back toward the house, not feeling comfortable enough in Bubba’s presence to prolong the conversation, if you could call it that. I wondered what thoughts Bubba had during his long watchful nights; I wondered if he remembered his past.

“What about that dog?” he called after me.

“He went home,” I called back over my shoulder.

“Too bad,” Bubba said to himself, so softly I almost didn’t hear him.

I got ready for bed. I watched television. I ate some ice cream, and I even chopped up a Heath Bar for a topping. None of my usual comfort things seemed to work tonight. My brother was in jail, my boyfriend was in New Orleans, my grandmother was dead, and someone had murdered my cat. I felt lonely and sorry for myself all the way around.

Sometimes you just have to roll in it.

Bill didn’t return my call.

That added fuel to the flame of my misery. He’d probably found some accommodating whore in New Orleans, or some fang-banger, like the ones who hung around Blood in the Quarter every night, hoping for a vampire “date.”

If I were a drinking woman, I would have gotten drunk. If I’d been a casual woman, I would have called lovely JB du Rone and had sex with him. But I’m not anything so dramatic or drastic, so I just ate ice cream and watched old movies on TV. By an eerie coincidence, Blue Hawaii was on.

I finally went to bed about midnight.

A shriek outside my bedroom window woke me up. I sat up straight in bed. I heard thumps, and thuds, and finally a voice I was sure was Bubba’s shouting, “Come back here, sucker!”

When I hadn’t heard anything in a couple of minutes, I pulled on a bathrobe and went to the front door. The yard, lit by the security light, was empty. Then I glimpsed movement to the left, and when I stuck my head out the door, I saw Bubba, trudging back to his hideout.

“What happened?” I called softly.

Bubba changed direction and slouched over to the porch.

“Sure enough, some sumbitch, scuse me, was sneaking around the house,” Bubba said. His brown eyes were glowing, and he looked more like his former self. “I heard him minutes before he got here, and I thought I’d catch ahold of him. But he cut through the woods to the road, and he had a truck parked there.”

“Did you get a look?”

“Not enough of one to describe him,” Bubba said shamefacedly. “He was driving a pickup, but I couldn’t even tell what color it was. Dark.”

“You saved me, though,” I said, hoping my very real gratitude showed in my voice. I felt a swell of love for Bill, who had arranged my protection. Even Bubba looked better than he had before. “Thanks, Bubba.”

“Aw, think nothing of it,” he said graciously, and for that moment he stood up straight, kind of tossed his head back, had that sleepy smile on his face . . . it was him, and I’d opened my mouth to say his name, when Bill’s warning came back to shut my mouth.





JASON MADE BAIL the next day.

It cost a fortune. I signed what Sid Matt told me to, though mostly the collateral was Jason’s house and truck and his fishing boat. If Jason had ever been arrested before, even for jaywalking, I don’t think he would have been permitted to post bond.

I was standing on the courthouse steps wearing my horrible, sober, navy blue suit in the heat of the late morning. Sweat trickled down my face and ran between my lips in that nasty way that makes you want to go jump in the shower. Jason stopped in front of me. I hadn’t been sure he would speak. His face was years older. Real trouble had come to sit on his shoulder, real trouble that would not go away or ease up, like grief did.

“I can’t talk to you about this,” he said, so softly I could barely hear him. “You know it wasn’t me. I’ve never been violent beyond a fight or two in a parking lot over some woman.”

I touched his shoulder, let my hand drop when he didn’t respond. “I never thought it was you. I never will. I’m sorry I was fool enough to call 911 yesterday. If I’d realized that wasn’t your blood, I’d have taken you into Sam’s trailer and cleaned you up and burned the tape. I was just so scared that was your blood.” And I felt my eyes fill. This was no time to cry, though, and I tightened up all over, feeling my face tense. Jason’s mind was a mess, like a mental pigsty. In it bubbled an unhealthy brew compounded of regrets, shame at his sexual habits being made public, guilt that he didn’t feel worse about Amy being killed, horror that anyone in the town would think he’d killed his own grandmother while lying in wait for his sister.

“We’ll get through this,” I said helplessly.

“We’ll get through this,” he repeated, trying to make his voice sound strong and assured. But I thought it would be a while, a long while, before Jason’s assurance, that golden certainty that had made him irresistible, returned to his posture and his face and his speech.

Maybe it never would.