“Never,” he said, and his smooth voice was cold. “Never.” I felt his hands grip my shoulders; he was on one elbow beside me. He scooted a little closer, and I could feel the cool length of his body.

“Listen, Bill,” I said. “I’m not educated, but I’m not stupid. I’m not real experienced or worldly, either, but I don’t think I’m naive.” I hoped he wasn’t smiling in the dark. “I can make them accept you. I can.”

“If anyone can, you will,” he said. “I want to enter you again.”

“You mean—? Oh, yeah. I see what you mean.” He’d taken my hand and guided it down to him. “I’d like that, too.” And I sure would, if I could survive it after the pounding I’d taken in the graveyard. Bill had been so angry that now I felt battered. But I could also feel that liquidy warm feeling running through me, that restless excitement to which Bill had addicted me. “Honey,” I said, caressing him up and down his length, “honey.” I kissed him, felt his tongue in my mouth. I touched his fangs with my own tongue. “Can you do it without biting?” I whispered.

“Yes. It’s just like a grand finale when I taste your blood.”

“Would it be almost as good without?”

“It can never be as good without, but I don’t want to weaken you.”

“If you wouldn’t mind,” I said tentatively. “It took me a few days to feel up to par.”

“I’ve been selfish . . . you’re just so good.”

“If I’m strong, it’ll be even better,” I suggested.

“Show me how strong you are,” he said teasingly.

“Lie on your back. I’m not real sure how this works, but I know other people do it.” I straddled him, heard his breathing quicken. I was glad the room was dark and outside the rain was still pouring. A flash of lightening showed me his eyes, glowing. I carefully maneuvered into what I hoped was the correct position, and guided him inside me. I had great faith in instinct, and sure enough it didn’t play me false.





8

TOGETHER AGAIN, MY DOUBTS AT LEAST TEMPORARILY drenched by the fear I’d felt when I’d thought I might have lost him, Bill and I settled into an uneasy routine.

If I worked nights, I would go over to Bill’s house when I finished, and usually I spent the rest of the night there. If I worked days, Bill would come to my house after sunset, and we would watch TV, or go to the movies, or play Scrabble. I had to have every third night off, or Bill had to refrain from biting those nights; otherwise I began to feel weak and draggy. And there was the danger, if Bill fed on me too much . . . I kept chugging vitamins and iron until Bill complained about the flavor. Then I cut back on the iron.

When I slept at night, Bill would go do other stuff. Sometimes he read, sometimes he wandered the night; sometimes he’d go out and do my yard work under the illumination of the security lights.

If he ever took blood from anyone else, he kept it secret, and he did it far from Bon Temps, which was what I had asked.

I say this routine was uneasy because it seemed to me that we were waiting. The burning of the Monroe nest had enraged Bill and (I think) frightened him. To be so powerful when awake and so helpless when asleep had to be galling.

Both of us were wondering if public feeling against vampires would abate now that the worst troublemakers in the area were dead.

Though Bill didn’t say anything directly, I knew from the course our conversation took from time to time that he was worried about my safety with the murderer of Dawn, Maudette, and my grandmother still at large.

If the men of Bon Temps and the surrounding towns thought burning out the Monroe vampires would set their minds at ease about the murders, they were wrong. Autopsy reports from the three victims finally proved they had their full complement of blood when they were killed. Furthermore, the bite marks on Maudette and Dawn had not only looked old, they were proved to be old. The cause of their deaths was strangulation. Maudette and Dawn had had sex before they’d died. And afterward.

Arlene and Charlsie and I were cautious about things like going out into the parking lot by ourselves, making sure our homes were still locked tight before we entered them, trying to notice what cars were around us as we drove. But it’s hard to keep careful that way, a real strain on the nerves, and I am sure we all lapsed back into our sloppy ways. Maybe it was more excusable for Arlene and Charlsie, since they lived with other people, unlike the first two victims; Arlene with her kids (and Rene Lenier, off and on), and Charlsie with her husband, Ralph.

I was the only one who lived alone.

Jason came into the bar almost every night, and he made a point of talking to me every time. I realized he was trying to heal whatever breach lay between us, and I responded as much as I could. But Jason was drinking more, too, and his bed had as many occupants as a public toilet, though he seemed to have real feelings for Liz Barrett. We worked cautiously together on settling the business of Gran’s estate and Uncle Bartlett’s, though he had more to do with that than I. Uncle Bartlett had left Jason everything but my legacy.

Jason told me one night when he’d had an extra beer that he’d been back to the police station twice more, and it was driving him crazy. He’d talked to Sid Matt Lancaster, finally, and Sid Matt had advised Jason not to go to the police station anymore unless Sid Matt went with him.

“How come they keep hauling you in?” I asked Jason. “There must be something you haven’t told me. Andy Bellefleur hasn’t kept after anybody else, and I know Dawn and Maudette both weren’t too picky about who came home with them.”

Jason looked mortified. I’d never seen my beautiful older brother look as embarrassed.

“Movies,” he mumbled.

I bent closer to be sure I’d heard him right. “Movies?” I said, incredulously.

“Shhh,” he hissed, looking guilty as hell. “We made movies.”

I guess I was just as embarrassed as Jason. Sisters and brothers don’t need to know everything about each other. “And you gave them a copy,” I said tentatively, trying to figure out just how dumb Jason had been.

He looked off in another direction, his hazy blue eyes romantically shiny with tears.

“Moron,” I said. “Even allowing for the fact that you couldn’t know how this was gonna come to public light, what’s gonna happen when you decide to get married? What if one of your ex-flames mails a copy of your little tango to your bride-to-be?”

“Thanks for kicking me when I’m down, Sis.”

I took a deep breath. “Okay, okay. You’ve quit making these little videos, right?”

He nodded emphatically. I didn’t believe him.

“And you told Sid Matt all about it, right?”

He nodded less firmly.

“And you think that’s why Andy is on your case so much?”

“Yeah,” Jason said morosely.

“So, if they test your semen and it isn’t a match for what was inside Maudette and Dawn, you’re clear.” By now, I was as shifty-faced as my brother. We had never talked about semen samples before.

“That’s what Sid Matt says. I just don’t trust that stuff.”

My brother didn’t trust the most reliable scientific evidence that could be presented in a court. “You think Andy’s going to fake the results?”

“No, Andy’s okay. He’s just doing his job. I just don’t know about that DNA stuff.”

“Moron,” I said, and turned away to get another pitcher of beer for four guys from Ruston, college students on a big night out in the boonies. I could only hope Sid Matt Lancaster was good at persuasion.

I spoke to Jason once more before he left Merlotte’s. “Can you help me?” he asked, turning up to me a face I hardly recognized. I was standing by his table, and his date for the night had gone to the ladies’ room.

My brother had never asked me for help before.

“How?”

“Can’t you just read the minds of the men who come in here and find out if one of them did it?”

“That’s not as easy as it sounds, Jason,” I said slowly, thinking as I went along. “For one thing, the man would have to be thinking of his crime while he sat here, at the exact moment I listened in. For another thing, I can’t always read clear thoughts. Some people, it’s just like listening to a radio, I can hear every little thing. Other people, I just get a mass of feelings, not spelled out; it’s like hearing someone talk in their sleep, see? You can hear they’re talking, you can tell if they’re upset or happy, but you can’t hear the exact words. And then other times, I can hear a thought, but I can’t trace it to its source if the room is crowded.”

Jason was staring at me. It was the first time we had talked openly about my disability.

“How do you stop from going crazy?” he asked, shaking his head in amazement.

I was about to try to explain putting up my guard, but Liz Barrett returned to the table, newly lipsticked and fluffed. I watched Jason resume his woman-hunting persona like shrugging on a heavy coat, and I regretted not getting to talk to him more when he was by himself.

That night, as the staff got ready to leave, Arlene asked me if I could baby-sit for her the next evening. It would be an off-day for both of us, and she wanted to go to Shreveport with Rene to see a movie and go out to eat.

“Sure!” I said. “I haven’t kept the kids in a while.”

Suddenly Arlene’s face froze. She half turned to me, opened her mouth, thought the better of speaking, then thought again. “Will . . . ah . . . will Bill be there?”

“Yes, we’d planned on watching a movie. I was going to stop by the video rental place, tomorrow morning. But I’ll get something for the kids to watch instead.” Abruptly, I caught her meaning. “Whoa. You mean you don’t want to leave the kids with me if Bill’s gonna be there?” I could feel my eyes narrow to slits and my voice drop down to its angry register.

“Sookie,” she began helplessly, “honey, I love you. But you can’t understand, you’re not a mother. I can’t leave my kids with a vampire. I just can’t.”

“No matter that I’m there, and I love your kids, too? No matter that Bill would never in a million years harm a child.” I slung my purse over my shoulder and stalked out the back door, leaving Arlene standing there looking torn. By golly, she ought to be upset!

I was a little calmer by the time I turned onto the road to go home, but I was still riled up. I was worried about Jason, miffed at Arlene, and almost permanently frosted at Sam, who was pretending these days that I was a mere acquaintance. I debated whether to just go home rather than going to Bill’s; decided that was a good idea.

It was a measure of how much he worried about me that Bill was at my house about fifteen minutes after I should have been at his.

“You didn’t come, you didn’t call,” he said quietly when I answered the door.

“I’m in a temper,” I said. “A bad one.”

Wisely he kept his distance.

“I apologize for making you worry,” I said after a moment. “I won’t do that again.” I strode away from him, toward the kitchen. He followed behind, or at least I presumed he did. Bill was so quiet you never knew until you looked.

He leaned against the door frame as I stood in the middle of the kitchen floor, wondering why I’d come in the room, feeling a rising tide of anger. I was getting pissed off all over again. I really wanted to throw something, damage something. This was not the way I’d been brought up, to give way to destructive impulses like that. I contained it, screwing my eyes shut, clenching my fists.

“I’m gonna dig a hole,” I said, and I marched out the back door. I opened the door to the toolshed, removed the shovel, and stomped to the back of the yard. There was a patch back there where nothing ever grew, I don’t know why. I sunk the shovel in, pushed it with my foot, came up with a hunk of soil. I kept on going. The pile of dirt grew as the hole deepened.

“I have excellent arm and shoulder muscles,” I said, resting against the shovel and panting.

Bill was sitting in a lawn chair watching. He didn’t say anything.

I resumed digging.

Finally, I had a really nice hole.

“Were you going to bury anything?” Bill asked, when he could tell I was done.

“No.” I looked down at the cavity in the ground. “I’m going to plant a tree.”

“What kind?”

“A live oak,” I said off the top of my head.

“Where can you get one?”

“At the Garden Center. I’ll go sometime this week.”

“They take a long time to grow.”

“What difference would that make to you?” I snapped. I put the shovel up in the shed, then leaned against it, suddenly exhausted.

Bill made as if to pick me up.

“I am a grown woman,” I snarled. “I can walk into the house on my own.”

“Have I done something to you?” Bill asked. There was very little loving in his voice, and I was brought up short. I had indulged myself enough.

“I apologize,” I said. “Again.”

“What has made you so angry?”

I just couldn’t tell him about Arlene.

“What do you do when you get mad, Bill?”

“I tear up a tree,” he said. “Sometimes I hurt someone.”

Digging a hole didn’t seem so bad. It had been sort of constructive. But I was still wired—it was just more of a subdued buzz than a high-frequency whine. I cast around restlessly for something to affect.

Bill seemed adept at reading the symptoms. “Make love,” he suggested. “Make love with me.”

“I’m not in the right mood for love.”

“Let me try to persuade you.”

It turned out he could.

At least it wore off the excess energy of anger, but I still had a residue of sadness that sex couldn’t cure. Arlene had hurt my feelings. I stared into space while Bill braided my hair, a pastime that he apparently found soothing.

Every now and then I felt like I was Bill’s doll.

“Jason was in the bar tonight,” I said.

“What did he want?”

Bill was too clever by far, sometimes, at reading people.

“He appealed to my mind-reading powers. He wanted me to scan the minds of the men who came into the bar until I found out who the murderer was.”

“Except for a few dozen flaws, that’s not a bad idea.”

“You think?”

“Both your brother and I will be regarded with less suspicion if the murderer is in jail. And you’ll be safe.”

“That’s true, but I don’t know how to go about it. It would be hard, and painful, and boring, to wade through all that stuff trying to find a little bit of information, a flash of thought.”

“Not any more painful or hard than being suspected of murder. You’re just accustomed to keeping your gift locked up.”

“Do you think so?” I began to turn to look at his face, but he held me still so he could finish braiding. I’d never seen keeping out of people’s minds as selfish, but in this case I supposed it was. I would have to invade a lot of privacy. “A detective,” I murmured, trying to see myself in a better light than just nosey.

“Sookie,” Bill said, and something in his voice made me take notice. “Eric has told me to bring you to Shreveport again.”

It took me a second to remember who Eric was. “Oh, the big Viking vampire?”

“The very old vampire,” Bill said precisely.

“You mean, he ordered you to bring me there?” I didn’t like the sound of this at all. I’d been sitting on the side of the bed, Bill behind me, and now I turned to look in his face. This time he didn’t stop me. I stared at Bill, seeing something in his face that I’d never seen before. “You have to do this,” I said, appalled. I could not imagine someone giving Bill an order. “But honey, I don’t want to go see Eric.”

I could see that made no difference.

“What is he, the Godfather of vampires?” I asked, angry and incredulous. “Did he make you an offer you couldn’t refuse?”

“He is older than me. More to the point, he is stronger.”

“Nobody’s stronger than you,” I said stoutly.

“I wish you were right.”

“So is he the head of Vampire Region Ten, or something?”

“Yes. Something like that.”

Bill was always closemouthed about how vampires controlled their own affairs. That had been fine with me, until now.

“What does he want? What will happen if I don’t go?”

Bill just sidestepped the first question. “He’ll send someone—several someones—to get you.”

“Other vampires.”

“Yes.” Bill’s eyes were opaque, shining with his difference, brown and rich.

I tried to think this through. I wasn’t used to being ordered around. I wasn’t used to no choices at all. It took my thick skull several minutes to evaluate the situation.

“So, you’d feel obliged to fight them?”

“Of course. You are mine.”

There was that “mine” again. It seemed he really meant it. I sure felt like whining, but I knew it wouldn’t do any good.

“I guess I have to go,” I said, trying not to sound bitter. “This is just plain old blackmail.”

“Sookie, vampires aren’t like humans. Eric is using the best means to achieve his goal, which is getting you to Shreveport. He didn’t have to spell all this out; I understood it.”

“Well, I understand it now, but I hate it. I’m between a rock and hard place! What does he want me for, anyway?” An obvious answer popped right into my mind, and I looked at Bill, horrified. “Oh, no, I won’t do that!”

“He won’t have sex with you or bite you, not without killing me.” Bill’s glowing face lost all vestiges of familiarity and became utterly alien.

“And he knows that,” I said tentatively, “so there must be another reason he wants me in Shreveport.”

“Yes,” Bill agreed, “but I don’t know what it is.”

“Well, if it doesn’t have to do with my physical charms, or the unusual quality of my blood, it must have to do with my . . . little quirk.”

“Your gift.”

“Right,” I said, sarcasm dripping from my voice. “My precious gift.” All the anger I thought I’d eased off my shoulders came back to sit like a four-hundred-pound gorilla. And I was scared to death. I wondered how Bill felt. I was even scared to ask that.

“When?” I asked instead.

“Tomorrow night.”

“I guess this is the downside of nontraditional dating.” I stared over Bill’s shoulder at the pattern of the wallpaper my grandmother had chosen ten years ago. I promised myself that if I got through this, I would repaper.

“I love you.” His voice was just a whisper.

This wasn’t Bill’s fault. “I love you, too,” I said. I had to stop myself from begging, Please don’t let the bad vampire hurt me, please don’t let the vampire rape me. If I was between a rock and a hard place, Bill was doubly so. I couldn’t even begin to estimate the self-control he was employing. Unless he really was calm? Could a vampire face pain and this form of helplessness without some inner turmoil?

I searched his face, the familiar clear lines and white matte complexion, the dark arches of his brows and proud line of his nose. I observed that Bill’s fangs were only slightly extended, and rage and lust ran them full out.

“Tonight,” he said. “Sookie . . .” His hands began urging me to lie beside him.

“What?”

“Tonight, I think, you should drink from me.”

I made a face. “Ick! Don’t you need all your strength for tomorrow night? I’m not hurt.”

“How have you felt since you drank from me? Since I put my blood inside you?”

I mulled it over. “Good,” I admitted.

“Have you been sick?”

“No, but then I almost never am.”

“Have you had more energy?”

“When you weren’t taking it back!” I said tartly, but I could feel my lips curve up in a little smile.

“Have you been stronger?”

“I—yes, I guess I have.” I realized for the first time how extraordinary it was that I’d carried in a new chair, by myself, the week before.

“Has it been easier to control your power?”

“Yes, I did notice that.” I’d written it off to increased relaxation.

“If you drink from me tonight, tomorrow night you will have more resources.”

“But you’ll be weaker.”

“If you don’t take much, I’ll recoup during the day when I sleep. And I may have to find someone else to drink from tomorrow night before we go.”

My face filled with hurt. Suspecting he was doing it and knowing were sure two different things.

“Sookie, this is for us. No sex with anyone else, I promise you.”

“You really think all this is necessary?”

“Maybe necessary. At least helpful. And we need all the help we can get.”

“Oh, all right. How do we do this?” I had only the haziest recollection of the night of the beating, and I was glad of it.

He looked at me quizzically. I had the impression he was amused. “Aren’t you excited, Sookie?”

“At drinking blood from you? Excuse me, that’s not my turn-on.”

He shook his head, as if that was beyond his understanding. “I forget,” he said simply. “I forget how it is to be otherwise. Would you prefer neck, wrist, groin?”

“Not groin,” I said hastily. “I don’t know, Bill. Yuck. Whichever.”

“Neck,” he said. “Lie on top of me, Sookie.”

“That’s like sex.”

“It’s the easiest way.”

So I straddled him and gently let myself down. This felt very peculiar. This was a position we used for lovemaking and nothing else.

“Bite, Sookie,” he whispered.

“I can’t do that!” I protested.

“Bite, or I’ll have to use a knife.”

“My teeth aren’t sharp like yours.”

“They’re sharp enough.”

“I’ll hurt you.”

He laughed silently. I could feel his chest moving beneath me.

“Damn.” I breathed, and steeling myself, I bit his neck. I did a good job because there was no sense prolonging this. I tasted the metallic blood in my mouth. Bill groaned softly, and his hands brushed my back and continued down. His fingers found me.

I gave a gasp of shock.

“Drink,” he said raggedly, and I sucked hard. He groaned, louder, deeper, and I felt him pressing against me. A little ripple of madness went through me, and I attached myself to him like a barnacle, and he entered me, began moving, his hands now gripping my hip bones. I drank and saw visions, visions all with a background of darkness, of white things coming up from the ground and going hunting, the thrill of the run through the woods, the prey panting ahead and the excitement of its fear; pursuit, legs pumping, hearing the thrumming of blood through the veins of the pursued . . .

Bill made a noise deep in his chest and convulsed inside me. I raised my head from his neck, and a wave of dark delight carried me out to sea.

This was pretty exotic stuff for a telepathic barmaid from northern Louisiana.





9

I WAS GETTING READY AT SUNSET THE NEXT DAY. BILL HAD said he was going to feed somewhere before we went, and as upset as the idea made me, I had to agree it made sense. He was right about how I’d feel after my little informal vitamin supplement the night before, too. I felt super. I felt very strong, very alert, very quick-witted, and oddly enough, I also felt very pretty.

What would I wear for my own little interview with a vampire? I didn’t want to look like I was trying to be sexy, but I didn’t want to make a fool of myself by wearing a shapeless gunnysack, either. Blue jeans seemed to be the answer, as they so often are. I put on white sandals and a pale blue scoop-neck tee. I hadn’t worn it since I’d started seeing Bill because it exposed his fang marks. But Bill’s “ownership” of me, I figured, could not be too strongly reinforced tonight. Remembering the cop last time checking my neck, I tucked a scarf in my purse. I thought again and added a silver necklace. I brushed my hair, which seemed at least three shades lighter, and let it ripple down my back.

Just when I was really having to struggle with picturing Bill with somebody else, he knocked. I opened the door and we stood looking at each other for a minute. His lips had more color than normal, so he’d done it. I bit my own lips to keep from saying anything.

“You did change,” he said first.

“You think anyone else’ll be able to tell?” I hoped not.

“I don’t know.” He held out his hand, and we walked to his car. He opened my door, and I brushed by him to climb in. I stiffened.

“What’s wrong?” he asked, after a moment.

“Nothing,” I said, trying to keep my voice even, and I sat in the passenger’s seat and stared straight ahead of me.

I told myself I might as well be mad at the cow who had given him his hamburger. But somehow the simile just didn’t work.

“You smell different,” I said after we’d been on the highway for a few minutes. We drove for a few minutes in silence.

“Now you know how I will feel if Eric touches you,” he told me. “But I think I’ll feel worse because Eric will enjoy touching you, and I didn’t much enjoy my feeding.”

I figured that wasn’t totally, strictly true: I know I always enjoy eating even if I’m not served my favorite food. But I appreciated the sentiment.

We didn’t talk much. We were both worried about what was ahead of us. All too soon, we were parking at Fangtasia again, but this time in the back. As Bill held open the car door, I had to fight an impulse to cling to the seat and refuse to get out. Once I made myself emerge, I had another struggle involving my intense desire to hide behind Bill. I gave a kind of gasp, took his arm, and we walked to the door like we were going to a party we were anticipating with pleasure.

Bill looked down at me with approval.

I fought an urge to scowl at him.

He knocked on the metal door with FANGTASIA stencilled on it. We were in a service and delivery alley that ran behind all the stores in the little strip mall. There were several other cars parked back there, Eric’s sporty red convertible among them. All the vehicles were high-priced.

You won’t find a vampire in a Ford Fiesta.

Bill knocked, three quick, two spaced apart. The Secret Vampire Knock, I guess. Maybe I’d get to learn the Secret Handshake.

The beautiful blond vampire opened the door, the female who’d been at the table with Eric when I’d been to the bar before. She stood back without speaking to let us enter.

If Bill had been human, he would have protested at how tightly I was holding his hand.

The female was in front of us more quickly than my eyes could follow, and I started. Bill wasn’t surprised at all, naturally. She led us through a storeroom disconcertingly similar to Merlotte’s and into a little corridor. We went through the door on our right.

Eric was in the small room, his presence dominating it. Bill didn’t exactly kneel to kiss his ring, but he did nod kind of deep. There was another vampire in the room, the bartender, Long Shadow; he was in fine form tonight, in a skinny-strap tee and weight-lifting pants, all in deep green.

“Bill, Sookie,” Eric greeted us. “Bill, you and Sookie know Long Shadow. Sookie, you remember Pam.” Pam was the blond female. “And this is Bruce.”

Bruce was a human, the most frightened human I’d ever seen. I had considerable sympathy with that. Middle-aged and paunchy, Bruce had thinning dark hair that curved in stiff waves across his scalp. He was jowly and small-mouthed. He was wearing a nice suit, beige, with a white shirt and a brown and navy patterned tie. He was sweating heavily. He was in a straight chair across the desk from Eric. Naturally, Eric was in the power chair. Pam and Long Shadow were standing against the wall across from Eric, by the door. Bill took his place beside them, but as I moved to join him, Eric spoke again.

“Sookie, listen to Bruce.”

I stood staring at Bruce for a second, waiting for him to speak, until I understood what Eric meant.

“What exactly am I listening for?” I asked, knowing my voice was sharp.

“Someone has embezzled about sixty thousand dollars from us,” Eric explained.

Boy, somebody had a death wish.

“And rather than put all our human employees to death or torture, we thought perhaps you would look into their minds and tell us who it was.”

He said “death or torture” as calmly as I said, “Bud or Old Milwaukee.”

“And then what will you do?” I asked.

Eric seemed surprised.

“Whoever it is will give our money back,” he said simply.

“And then?”

His big blue eyes narrowed as he stared at me.

“Why, if we can produce proof of the crime, we’ll turn the culprit over to the police,” he said smoothly.

Liar, liar, pants on fire. “I’ll make a deal, Eric,” I said, not bothering to smile. Winsome did not count with Eric, and he was far from any desire to jump my bones. At the moment.

He smiled, indulgently. “What would that be, Sookie?”

“If you really do turn the guilty person over to the police, I’ll do this for you again, whenever you want.”

Eric cocked an eyebrow.

“Yeah, I know I’d probably have to anyway. But isn’t it better if I come willing, if we have good faith with each other?” I broke into a sweat. I could not believe I was bargaining with a vampire.

Eric actually seemed to be thinking that over. And suddenly, I was in his thoughts. He was thinking he could make me do what he wanted, anywhere, anytime, just by threatening Bill or some human I loved. But he wanted to mainstream, to keep as legal as he could, to keep his relations with humans aboveboard, or at least as aboveboard as vampire-human dealings could be. He didn’t want to kill anyone if he didn’t have to.

It was like suddenly being plunged into a pit of snakes, cold snakes, lethal snakes. It was only a flash, a slice of his mind, sort of, but it left me facing a whole new reality.

“Besides,” I said quickly, before he could see I’d been inside his head, “how sure are you that the thief is a human?”

Pam and Long Shadow both moved suddenly, but Eric flooded the room with his presence, commanding them to be still.

“That’s an interesting idea,” he said. “Pam and Long Shadow are my partners in this bar, and if none of the humans is guilty, I guess we’ll have to look at them.”

“Just a thought,” I said meekly, and Eric looked at me with the glacial blue eyes of a being who hardly remembers what humanity was like.

“Start now, with this man,” he commanded.

I knelt by Bruce’s chair, trying to decide how to proceed. I’d never tried to formalize something that was pretty chancy. Touching would help; direct contact clarified the transmission, so to speak. I took Bruce’s hand, found that too personal (and too sweaty) and pushed back his coat cuff. I took hold of his wrist. I looked into his small eyes.

I didn’t take the money, who took it, what crazy fool would put us in danger like this, what will Lillian do if they kill me, and Bobby and Heather, why did I work for vampires anyway, it’s sheer greed, and I’m paying for it, God I’ll never work for these things again how can this crazy woman find out who took the fucking money why doesn’t she let go of me what is she is she a vampire, too, or some kind of demon her eyes are so strange I should have found out earlier that the money was missing and found out who took it before I even said anything to Eric . . .

“Did you take the money?” I breathed, though I was sure I already knew the answer.

“No,” Bruce groaned, sweat running down his face, and his thoughts, his reaction to the question, confirmed what I’d heard already.

“Do you know who did?”

“I wish.”

I stood, turned to Eric, shook my head. “Not this guy,” I said.

Pam escorted poor Bruce out, brought in the next interrogee.

My subject was a barmaid, dressed in trailing black with lots of cleavage on display, her ragged strawberry blond hair straggling down her back. Of course, working at Fangtasia would be a dream job for a fang-banger, and this gal had the scars to prove she enjoyed her perks. She was confident enough to grin at Eric, foolish enough to take the wooden chair with some confidence, even crossing her legs like Sharon Stone—she hoped. She was surprised to see a strange vampire and a new woman in the room, and not pleased by my presence, though Bill made her lick her lips.

“Hey, sweetie,” she said to Eric, and I decided she must have no imagination at all.

“Ginger, answer this woman’s questions,” Eric said. His voice was like a stone wall, flat and implacable.

Ginger seemed to understand for the first time that this was a time to be serious. She crossed her ankles this time, sat with her hands on the tops of her thighs, and assumed a stern face. “Yes, master,” she said, and I thought I was going to barf.

She waved an imperious hand at me, as if to say, “Begin, fellow vampire server.” I reached down for her wrist, and she flung my hand away. “Don’t touch me,” she said, almost hissing.

It was such an extreme reaction that the vampires tensed up, and I could feel that crackling the air in the room.

“Pam, hold Ginger still,” Eric commanded, and Pam appeared silently behind Ginger’s chair, leaning over and putting her hands on Ginger’s upper arms. You could tell Ginger struggled some because her head moved around, but Pam held her upper body in a grip that kept the girl’s body absolutely immobile.

My fingers circled her wrist. “Did you take the money?” I asked, staring into Ginger’s flat brown eyes.

She screamed, then, long and loud. She began to curse me. I listened to the chaos in the girl’s tiny brain. It was like trying to walk over a bombed site.

“She knows who did,” I said to Eric. Ginger fell silent then, though she was sobbing. “She can’t say the name,” I told the blond vampire. “He has bitten her.” I touched the scars on Ginger’s neck as if that needed more illustration. “It’s some kind of compulsion,” I reported, after I’d tried again. “She can’t even picture him.”

“Hypnosis,” Pam commented. Her proximity to the frightened girl had made Pam’s fangs run out. “A strong vampire.”

“Bring in her closest friend,” I suggested.

Ginger was shaking like a leaf by then with thoughts she was compelled not to think pressing her from their locked closet.

“Should she stay, or go?” Pam asked me directly.

“She should go. It’ll only scare someone else.”

I was so into this, so into openly using my strange ability, that I didn’t look at Bill. I felt that somehow if I looked at him, it would weaken me. I knew where he was, that he and Long Shadow had not moved since the questioning had begun.

Pam hauled the trembling Ginger away. I don’t know what she did with the barmaid, but she returned with another waitress in the same kind of clothes. This woman’s name was Belinda, and she was older and wiser. Belinda had brown hair, glasses, and the sexiest pouting mouth I’d ever seen.

“Belinda, what vampire has Ginger been seeing?” Eric asked smoothly once Belinda was seated, and I was touching her. The waitress had enough sense to accept the process quietly, enough intelligence to realize she had to be honest.

“Anyone that would have her,” Belinda said bluntly.

I saw an image in Belinda’s mind, but she had to think the name.

“Which one from here?” I asked suddenly, and then I had the name. My eyes sought his corner before I could open my mouth, and then he was on me, Long Shadow, vaulting over the chair holding Belinda to land on top of me as I crouched in front of her. I was bowled over backward into Eric’s desk, and only my upflung arms saved me from his teeth sinking into my throat and ripping it out. He bit my forearm savagely, and I screamed; at least I tried to, but with so little air left from the impact it was more like an alarmed choking noise.

I was only conscious of the heavy figure on top of me and the pain of my arm, my own fear. I hadn’t been frightened that the Rats were going to kill me until almost too late, but I understood that to keep his name from leaving my lips, Long Shadow was ready to kill me instantly, and when I heard the awful noise and felt his body press even harder on me, I didn’t have any idea what it meant. I’d been able to see his eyes over the top of my arm. They were wide, brown, crazed, icy. Suddenly, they dulled and seemed to almost flatten. Blood gushed out of Long Shadow’s mouth, bathing my arm. It flowed into my open mouth, and I gagged. His teeth relaxed, and his face fell in on itself. It began to wrinkle. His eyes turned into gelatinous pools. Handfuls of his thick black hair fell on my face.

I was shocked beyond moving. Hands gripped my shoulders and began pulling me out from under the decaying corpse. I pushed with my feet to scrabble back faster.

There wasn’t an odor, but there was gunk, black and streaky, and the absolute horror and disgust of watching Long Shadow deconstruct with incredible speed. There was a stake sticking out of his back. Eric stood watching, as we all were, but he had a mallet in his hand. Bill was behind me, having pulled me out from under Long Shadow. Pam was standing by the door, her hand gripping Belinda’s arm. The waitress looked as rocky as I must have.

Even the gunk began to vanish in smoke. We all stood frozen until the last wisp was gone. The carpet had a kind of scorched mark on it.

“You’ll have to get you an area rug,” I said, completely out of the blue. Honest to God, I couldn’t stand the silence anymore.

“Your mouth is bloody,” Eric said. All the vampires had fully extended fangs. They’d gotten pretty excited.

“He bled onto me.”

“Did any go down your throat?”

“Probably. What does that mean?”

“That remains to be seen,” Pam said. Her voice was dark and husky. She was eyeing Belinda in a way that would have made me distinctly nervous, but Belinda seemed to be preening, incredibly. “Usually,” Pam went on, her eyes on Belinda’s pouty lips, “we drink from humans, not the other way around.”

Eric was looking at me with interest, the same kind of interest that Pam had in Belinda. “How do things look to you now, Sookie?” he asked in such a smooth voice you’d never think he’d just executed an old friend.

How did things look to me now? Brighter. Sounds were clearer, and I could hear better. I wanted to turn and look at Bill, but I was scared to take my eyes off Eric.

“Well, I guess Bill and me’ll go now,” I said, as if no other process was possible. “I did that for you, Eric, and now we get to go. No retaliation for Ginger and Belinda and Bruce, okay? We agreed.” I started toward the door with an assurance I was far from feeling. “I’ll just bet you need to go see how the bar is doing, huh? Who’s mixing the drinks, tonight?”

“We got a substitute,” Eric said absently, his eyes never leaving my neck. “You smell different, Sookie,” he murmured, taking a step closer.

“Well, remember now, Eric, we had a deal,” I reminded him, my smile broad and tense, my voice snapping with good cheer. “Bill and I are going home now, aren’t we?” I risked a glance behind me at Bill. My heart sank. His eyes were open wide, unblinking, his lips drawn back in a silent snarl to expose his extended fangs. His pupils were dilated enormously. He was staring at Eric.

“Pam, get out of the way,” I said, quietly but sharply. Once Pam was distracted from her own blood lust, she evaluated the situation in one glance. She swung open the office door and propelled Belinda through it, stood beside it to usher us out. “Call Ginger,” I suggested, and the sense of what I was saying penetrated Pam’s fog of desire. “Ginger,” she called hoarsely, and the blond girl stumbled from a door down the hall. “Eric wants you,” Pam told her. Ginger’s face lit up like she had a date with David Duchovny, and she was in the room and rubbing against Eric almost as fast as a vampire could have. As if he’d woken from a spell, Eric looked down at Ginger when she ran her hands up his chest. As he bent to kiss her, Eric looked at me over her head. “I’ll see you again,” he said, and I pulled Bill out the door as quick as a wink. Bill didn’t want to go. It was like trying to tow a log. But once we were out in the hall, he seemed to be a little more aware of the need to get out of there, and we hurried from Fangtasia and got into Bill’s car.

I looked down at myself. I was bloodstained and wrinkled, and I smelled funny. Yuck. I looked over at Bill to share my disgust with him, but he was looking at me in an unmistakable way.

“No,” I said forcefully. “You start this car and get out of here before anything else happens, Bill Compton. I tell you flat, I’m not in the mood.”

He scooted across the seat toward me, his arms scooping me up before I could say anything else. Then his mouth was on mine, and after a second his tongue began licking the blood from my face.

I was really scared. I was also really angry. I grabbed his ears and pulled his head away from mine using every ounce of strength I possessed, which happened to be more than I thought I had.

His eyes were still like caves with ghosts dwelling in their depths.

“Bill!” I shrieked. I shook him. “Snap out of it!”

Slowly, his personality seeped back into his eyes. He drew a shuddering sigh. He kissed me lightly on the lips.

“Okay, can we go home now?” I asked, ashamed that my voice was so quavery.

“Sure,” he said, sounding none too steady himself.

“Was that like sharks scenting blood?” I asked, after a fifteen-minute silent drive that almost had us out of Shreveport.

“Good analogy.”

He didn’t need to apologize. He’d been doing what nature dictated, as least as natural as vampires got. He didn’t bother to. I would kind of liked to have heard an apology.

“So, am I in trouble?” I asked finally. It was two in the morning, and I found the question didn’t bother me as much as it should have.