
No reason not to. I reclaimed my hand and reached up to open the clip. I shook my head to loosen my hair. I stuck the clip in his pocket, since I hadn’t any. As if it was the most normal thing in the world, Bill began running his fingers through my hair, spreading it out on my shoulders.

I touched his sideburns, since apparently touching was okay. “They’re long,” I observed.

“That was the fashion,” he said. “It’s lucky for me I didn’t wear a beard as so many men did, or I’d have it for eternity.”

“You never have to shave?”

“No, luckily I had just shaven.” He seemed fascinated with my hair. “In the moonlight, it looks silver,” he said very quietly.

“Ah. What do you like to do?”

I could see a shadow of a smile in the darkness.

“I like to read, too.” He thought. “I like the movies . . . of course, I’ve followed their whole inception. I like the company of people who lead ordinary lives. Sometimes I crave the company of other vampires, though most of them lead very different lives from mine.”

We walked in silence for a moment.

“Do you like television?”

“Sometimes,” he confessed. “For a while I taped soap operas and watched them at night when I thought I might be forgetting what it was like to be human. After a while I stopped, because from the examples I saw on those shows, forgetting humanity was a good thing.” I laughed.

We walked into the circle of light around the house. I had half expected Gran to be on the porch swing waiting for us, but she wasn’t. And only one dim bulb glowed in the living room. Really, Gran, I thought, exasperated. This was just like being brought home from a first date by a new man. I actually caught myself wondering if Bill would try to kiss me or not. With his views on long dresses, he would probably think it was out of line. But as stupid as kissing a vampire might seem, I realized that was what I really wanted to do, more than anything.

I got a tight feeling in my chest, a bitterness, at another thing I was denied. And I thought, Why not?

I stopped him by pulling gently on his hand. I stretched up and lay my lips on his shining cheek. I inhaled the scent of him, ordinary but faintly salty. He was wearing a trace of cologne.

I felt him shudder. He turned his head so his lips touched mine. After a moment, I reached to circle his neck with my arms. His kiss deepened, and I parted my lips. I’d never been kissed like this. It went on and on until I thought the whole world was involved in this kiss, in the vampire’s mouth on mine. I could feel my breathing speeding up, and I began to want other things to happen.

Suddenly Bill pulled back. He looked shaken, which pleased me no end. “Good night, Sookie,” he said, stroking my hair one last time.

“Good night, Bill,” I said. I sounded pretty quavery myself. “I’ll try to call some electricians tomorrow. I’ll let you know what they say.”

“Come by the house tomorrow night—if you’re off work?”

“Yes,” I said. I was still trying to gather myself.

“See you then. Thanks, Sookie.” And he turned away to walk through the woods back over to his place. Once he reached the darkness, he was invisible.

I stood, staring like a fool, until I shook myself and went inside to go to bed.

I spent an indecent amount of time lying awake in bed wondering if the undead could actually do—it. Also, I wondered if it would be possible to have a frank discussion with Bill about that. Sometimes he seemed very old-fashioned, sometimes he seemed as normal as the guy next door. Well, not really, but pretty normal.

It seemed both wonderful and pathetic to me that the one creature I’d met in years that I’d want to have sex with was actually not human. My telepathy limited my options severely. I could have had sex just to have it, sure; but I had waited to have sex I could actually enjoy.

What if we did it, and after all these years I discovered I had no talent for it? Or maybe it wouldn’t feel good. Maybe all the books and movies exaggerated. Arlene, too, who never seemed to understand that her sex life was not something I wanted to hear about.

I finally got to sleep, to have long, dark dreams.

The next morning, between fielding Gran’s questions about my walk with Bill and our future plans, I made some phone calls. I found two electricians, a plumber, and some other service people who gave me phone numbers where they could be reached at night and made sure they understood that a phone call from Bill Compton was not a prank.

Finally, I was lying out in the sun turning toasty when Gran carried the phone out to me.

“It’s your boss,” she said. Gran liked Sam, and he must have said something to make her happy because she was grinning like a Cheshire cat.

“Hi, Sam,” I said, maybe not sounding too glad because I knew something had gone wrong at work.

“Dawn didn’t make it in, cher,” he said.

“Oh . . . hell,” I said, knowing I’d have to go in. “I kind of have plans, Sam.” That was a first. “When do you need me?”

“Could you just come in from five to nine? That would help out a lot.”

“Am I gonna get another full day off?”

“What about Dawn splitting a shift with you another night?”

I made a rude noise, and Gran stood there with a stern face. I knew I’d get a lecture later. “Oh, all right,” I said grudgingly. “See you at five.”

“Thanks, Sookie,” he said. “I knew I could count on you.”

I tried to feel good about that. It seemed like a boring virtue. You can always count on Sookie to step in and help because she doesn’t have a life!

Of course, it would be fine to get to Bill’s after nine. He’d be up all night, anyway.

Work had never seemed so slow. I had trouble concentrating enough to keep my guard intact because I was always thinking about Bill. It was lucky there weren’t many customers, or I would have heard unwanted thoughts galore. As it was, I found out Arlene’s period was late, and she was scared she was pregnant, and before I could stop myself I gave her a hug. She stared at me searchingly and then turned red in the face.

“Did you read my mind, Sookie?” she asked, warning written in her voice. Arlene was one of the few people who simply acknowledged my ability without trying to explain it or categorizing me as a freak for possessing such an ability. She also didn’t talk about it often or in any normal voice, I’d noticed.

“Sorry, I didn’t mean to,” I apologized. “I’m just not focused today.”

“All right, then. You stay out from now on, though.” And Arlene, her flaming curls bobbing around her cheeks, shook her finger in my face.

I felt like crying. “Sorry,” I said again and strode off into the storeroom to collect myself. I had to pull my face straight and hold in those tears.

I heard the door open behind me.

“Hey, I said I was sorry, Arlene!” I snapped, wanting to be left alone. Sometimes Arlene confused telepathy with psychic talent. I was scared she’d ask me if she was really pregnant. She’d be better off buying an early home pregnancy kit.

“Sookie.” It was Sam. He turned me around with a hand on my shoulder. “What’s wrong?”

His voice was gentle and pushed me much closer to tears.

“You should sound mean so I won’t cry!” I said.

He laughed, not a big laugh, a small one. He put an arm around me.

“What’s the matter?” He wasn’t going to give up and go away.

“Oh, I . . .” and I stopped dead. I’d never, ever explicitly discussed my problem (that’s how I thought of it) with Sam or anyone else. Everyone in Bon Temps knew the rumors about why I was strange, but no one seemed to realize that I had to listen to their mental clatter nonstop, whether I wanted to or not—every day, the yammer yammer yammer . . .

“Did you hear something that bothered you?” His voice was quiet and matter-of-fact. He touched the middle of my for-head, to indicate he knew exactly how I could “hear.”

“Yes.”

“Can’t help it, can you?”

“Nope.”

“Hate it, don’t you, cher?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Not your fault then, is it?”

“I try not to listen, but I can’t always keep my guard up.” I felt a tear I hadn’t been able to quell start trickling down my cheek.

“Is that how you do it? How do you keep your guard up, Sookie?”

He sounded really interested, not as though he thought I was a basket case. I looked up, not very far, into Sam’s prominent, brilliant blue eyes.

“I just . . . it’s hard to describe unless you can do it . . . I pull up a fence—no, not a fence, it’s like I’m snapping together steel plates—between my brain and all others.”

“You have to hold the plates up?”

“Yes. It takes a lot of concentration. It’s like dividing my mind all the time. That’s why people think I’m crazy. Half my brain is trying to keep the steel plates up, and the other half might be taking drink orders, so sometimes there’s not a lot left over for coherent conversation.” What a gush of relief I was feeling, just being able to talk about it.

“Do you hear words or just get impressions?”

“Depends on who I’m listening to. And their state. If they’re drunk, or really disturbed, it’s just pictures, impressions, intentions. If they’re sober and sane, it’s words and some pictures.”

“The vampire says you can’t hear him.”

The idea of Bill and Sam having a conversation about me made me feel very peculiar. “That’s true,” I admitted.

“Is that relaxing to you?”

“Oh, yes.” I meant it from my heart.

“Can you hear me, Sookie?”

“I don’t want to try!” I said hastily. I moved to the door of the storeroom and stood with my hand on the knob. I pulled a tissue from my shorts pocket and patted the tear track off my cheek. “I’ll have to quit if I read your mind, Sam! I like you, I like it here.”

“Just try it sometime, Sookie,” he said casually, turning to open a carton of whiskey with the razor-edged box cutter he kept in his pocket. “Don’t worry about me. You have a job as long as you want one.”

I wiped down a table Jason had spilled salt on. He’d been in earlier to eat a hamburger and fries and down a couple of beers.

I was turning over Sam’s offer in my mind.

I wouldn’t try to listen to him today. He was ready for me. I’d wait until he was busy doing something else. I’d just sort of slip in and give him a listen. He’d invited me, which was absolutely unique.

It was kind of nice to be invited.

I repaired my makeup and brushed my hair. I’d worn it loose, since Bill had seemed to like that, and a darn nuisance it had been all evening. It was just about time to go, so I retrieved my purse from its drawer in Sam’s office.





THE COMPTON HOUSE, like Gran’s, was set back from the road. It was a bit more visible from the parish road than hers, and it had a view of the cemetery, which her house didn’t. This was due (at least in part) to the Compton house’s higher setting. It was on top of a knoll and it was fully two-storied. Gran’s house had a couple of spare bedrooms upstairs, and an attic, but it was more like half a top story.

At one point in the family’s long history, the Comptons had had a very nice house. Even in the dark, it had a certain graciousness. But I knew in the daylight you could see the pillars were peeling, the wood siding was crooked, and the yard was simply a jungle. In the humid warmth of Louisiana, yard growth could get out of hand mighty quick, and old Mr. Compton had not been one to hire someone to do his yard work. When he’d gotten too feeble, it had simply gone undone.

The circular drive hadn’t gotten fresh gravel in many years, and my car lurched to the front door. I saw that the house was all lit up, and I began to realize that the evening would not go like last evening. There was another car parked in front of the house, a Lincoln Continental, white with a dark blue top. A blue-on-white bumper sticker read VAMPIRES SUCK. A red and yellow one stated HONK IF YOU’RE A BLOOD DONOR! The vanity plate read, simply, FANGS 1.

If Bill already had company, maybe I should just go on home.

But I had been invited and was expected. Hesitantly, I raised my hand and knocked.

The door was opened by a female vampire.

She glowed like crazy. She was at least five feet eleven and black. She was wearing spandex. An exercise bra in flamingo pink and matching calf-length leggings, with a man’s white dress shirt flung on unbuttoned, constituted the vampire’s ensemble.

I thought she looked cheap as hell and most likely absolutely mouthwatering from a male point of view.

“Hey, little human chick,” the vampire purred.

And all of a sudden I realized I was in danger. Bill had warned me repeatedly that not all vampires were like him, and he had moments when he was not so nice himself. I couldn’t read this creature’s mind, but I could hear cruelty in her voice.

Maybe she had hurt Bill. Maybe she was his lover.

All of this passed through my mind in a rush, but none of it showed on my face. I’ve had years of experience in controlling my face. I could feel my bright smile snap on protectively, my spine straightened, and I said cheerfully, “Hi! I was supposed to drop by tonight and give Bill some information. Is he available?”

The female vampire laughed at me, which was nothing I wasn’t used to. My smile notched up a degree brighter. This critter radiated danger the way a lightbulb gives off heat.

“This little human gal here says she has some information for you, Bill!” she yelled over her (slim, brown, beautiful) shoulder.

I tried not to let relief show in any way.

“You wanna see this little thing? Or shall I just give her a love bite?”

Over my dead body, I thought furiously, and then realized it might be just that.

I didn’t hear Bill speak, but the vampire stood back, and I stepped into the old house. Running wouldn’t do any good; this vamp could undoubtedly bring me down before I’d gone five steps. And I hadn’t laid eyes on Bill, and I couldn’t be sure he was all right until I saw him. I’d brave this out and hope for the best. I’m pretty good at doing that.

The big front room was crammed with dark old furniture and people. No, not people, I realized after I’d looked carefully; two people, and two more strange vampires.

The two vampires were both male and white. One had a buzz cut and tattoos on every visible inch of his skin. The other was even taller than the woman, maybe six foot four, with a head of long rippling dark hair and a magnificent build.

The humans were less impressive. The woman was blond and plump, thirty-five or older. She was wearing maybe a pound too much makeup. She looked as worn as an old boot. The man was another story. He was lovely, the prettiest man I’d ever seen. He couldn’t have been more than twenty-one. He was swarthy, maybe Hispanic, small and fine-boned. He wore denim cutoffs and nothing else. Except for makeup. I took that in my stride, but I didn’t find it appealing.

Then Bill moved and I saw him, standing in the shadows of the dark hall leading from the living room to the back of the house. I looked at him, trying to get my bearings in this unexpected situation. To my dismay, he didn’t look at all reassuring. His face was very still, absolutely impenetrable. Though I couldn’t believe I was even thinking it, it would have been great at that point to have had a peek into his mind.

“Well, we can have a wonderful evening now,” the long-haired male vampire said. He sounded delighted. “Is this a little friend of yours, Bill? She’s so fresh.”

I thought of a few choice words I’d learned from Jason.

“If you’ll just excuse me and Bill a minute,” I said very politely, as if this was a perfectly normal evening, “I’ve been arranging for workmen for the house.” I tried to sound businesslike and impersonal, though wearing shorts and a T-shirt and Nikes does not inspire professional respect. But I hoped I conveyed the impression that nice people I encountered in the course of my working day could not possibly hold any threat of danger.

“And we heard Bill was on a diet of synthetic blood only,” said the tattooed vampire. “Guess we heard wrong, Diane.”

The female vampire cocked her head and gave me a long look. “I’m not so sure. She looks like a virgin to me.”

I didn’t think Diane was talking hymens.

I took a few casual steps toward Bill, hoping like hell he would defend me if worst came to worst, but finding myself not absolutely sure. I was still smiling, hoping he would speak, would move.

And then he did. “Sookie is mine,” he said, and his voice was so cold and smooth it wouldn’t have made a ripple in the water if it had been a stone.

I looked at him sharply, but I had enough brains to keep my mouth shut.

“How good you been taking care of our Bill?” Diane asked.

“None of your fucking business,” I answered, using one of Jason’s words and still smiling. I said I had a temper.

There was a sharp little pause. Everyone, human and vampire, seemed to examine me closely enough to count the hairs on my arms. Then the tall male began to rock with laughter and the others followed suit. While they were yukking it up, I moved a few feet closer to Bill. His dark eyes were fixed on me—he wasn’t laughing—and I got the distinct feeling he wished, just as much as I did, that I could read his mind.

He was in some danger, I could tell. And if he was, then I was.

“You have a funny smile,” said the tall male thoughtfully. I’d liked him better when he was laughing.

“Oh, Malcolm,” said Diane. “All human women look funny to you.”

Malcolm pulled the human male to him and gave him a long kiss. I began to feel a little sick. That kind of stuff is private. “This is true,” Malcolm said, pulling away after a moment, to the small man’s apparent disappointment. “But there is something rare about this one. Maybe she has rich blood.”

“Aw,” said the blond woman, in a voice that could blister paint, “That’s just crazy Sookie Stackhouse.”

I looked at the woman with more attention. I recognized her at last, when I mentally erased a few miles of hard road and half the makeup. Janella Lennox had worked at Merlotte’s for two weeks until Sam had fired her. She’d moved to Monroe, Arlene had told me.

The male vampire with the tattoos put his arm around Janella and rubbed her breasts. I could feel the blood drain out of my face. I was disgusted. It got worse. Janella, as lost to decency as the vampire, put her hand on his crotch and massaged.

At least I saw clearly that vampires can sure have sex.

I was less than excited about that knowledge at the moment.

Malcolm was watching me, and I’d showed my distaste.

“She’s innocent,” he said to Bill, with a smile full of anticipation.

“She’s mine,” Bill said again. This time his voice was more intense. If he’d been a rattlesnake, his warning could not have been clearer.

“Now, Bill, you can’t tell me you’ve been getting everything you need from that little thing,” Diane said. “You look pale and droopy. She ain’t been taking good care of you.”

I inched a little closer to Bill.

“Here,” offered Diane, whom I was beginning to hate, “have a taste of Liam’s woman or Malcolm’s pretty boy, Jerry.”

Janella didn’t react to being offered around, maybe because she was too busy unzipping Liam’s jeans, but Malcolm’s beautiful boyfriend, Jerry, slithered willingly over to Bill. I smiled as though my jaws were going to crack as he wrapped his arms around Bill, nuzzled Bill’s neck, rubbed his chest against Bill’s shirt.

The strain in my vampire’s face was terrible to see. His fangs slid out. I saw them fully extended for the first time. The synthetic blood was not answering all Bill’s needs, all right.

Jerry began licking a spot at the base of Bill’s neck. Keeping my guard up was proving to be more than I could handle. Since three present were vampires, whose thoughts I couldn’t hear, and Janella was fully occupied, that left Jerry. I listened and gagged.

Bill, shaking with temptation, was actually bending to sink his fangs into Jerry’s neck when I said, “No! He has the Sinovirus!”

As if released from a spell, Bill looked at me over Jerry’s shoulder. He was breathing heavily, but his fangs retracted. I took advantage of the moment by taking more steps. I was within a yard of Bill, now.

“Sino-AIDS,” I said.

Alcoholic and heavily drugged victims affected vampires temporarily, and some of them were said to enjoy that buzz; but the blood of a human with full-blown AIDS didn’t, nor did sexually transmitted diseases, or any other bugs that plagued humans.

Except Sino-AIDS. Even Sino-AIDS didn’t kill vampires as surely as the AIDS virus killed humans, but it left the undead very weak for nearly a month, during which time it was comparatively easy to catch and stake them. And every now and then, if a vampire fed from an infected human more than once, the vampire actually died—redied?—without being staked. Still rare in the United States, Sino-AIDS was gaining a foothold around ports like New Orleans, with sailors and other travelers from many countries passing through the city in a partying mood.

All the vampires were frozen, staring at Jerry as if he were death in disguise; and for them, perhaps, he was.

The beautiful young man took me completely by surprise. He turned and leapt on me. He was no vampire, but he was strong, evidently only in the earliest stages of the virus, and he knocked me against the wall to my left. He circled my throat with one hand and lifted the other to punch me in the face. My arms were still coming up to defend myself when Jerry’s hand was seized, and his body froze.

“Let go of her throat,” Bill said in such a terrifying voice that I was scared myself. By now, the scares were just piling up so quickly I didn’t think I’d ever feel safe again. But Jerry’s fingers didn’t relax, and I made a little whimpering sound without wanting to at all. I slewed my eyes sideways, and when I looked at Jerry’s gray face, I realized that Bill was holding his hand, Malcolm was gripping his legs, and Jerry was so frightened he couldn’t grasp what was wanted of him.

The room began to get fuzzy, and voices buzzed in and out. Jerry’s mind was beating against mine. I was helpless to hold him out. His mind was clouded with visions of the lover who had passed the virus to Jerry, a lover who had left him for a vampire, a lover Jerry himself had murdered in a fit of jealous rage. Jerry was seeing his death coming from the vampires he had wanted to kill, and he was not satisfied that he had extracted enough vengeance with the vampires he had already infected.

I could see Diane’s face over Jerry’s shoulder, and she was smiling.

Bill broke Jerry’s wrist.

He screamed and collapsed on the floor. The blood began surging into my head again, and I almost fainted. Malcolm picked Jerry up and carried him over to the couch as casually as if Jerry were a rolled-up rug. But Malcolm’s face was not as casual. I knew Jerry would be lucky if he died quickly.

Bill stepped in front of me, taking Jerry’s place. His fingers, the fingers that had just broken Jerry’s wrist, massaged my neck as gently as my grandmother’s would have done. He put a finger across my lips to make sure I knew to keep silent.

Then, his arm around me, he turned to face the other vampires.

“This has all been very entertaining,” Liam said. His voice was as cool as if Janella wasn’t giving him a truly intimate massage there on the couch. He hadn’t troubled himself to budge during the whole incident. He had newly visible tattoos I could never in this world have imagined. I was sick to my stomach. “But I think we should be driving back to Monroe. We have to have a little talk with Jerry when he wakes up, right, Malcolm?”

Malcolm heaved the unconscious Jerry over his shoulder and nodded at Liam. Diane looked disappointed.

“But fellas,” she protested. “We haven’t found out how this little gal knew.”

The two male vampires simultaneously switched their gaze to me. Quite casually, Liam took a second off to reach a climax. Yep, vampires could do it, all right. After a little sigh of completion, he said, “Thanks, Janella. That’s a good question, Malcolm. As usual, our Diane has cut to the quick.” And the three visiting vampires laughed as if that was a very good joke, but I thought it was a scary one.

“You can’t speak yet, can you, sweetheart?” Bill gave my shoulder a squeeze as he asked, as if I couldn’t get the hint.

I shook my head.

“I could probably make her talk,” Diane offered.

“Diane, you forget,” Bill said gently.

“Oh, yeah. She’s yours,” Diane said. But she didn’t sound cowed or convinced.

“We’ll have to visit some other time,” Bill said, and his voice made it clear the others had to leave or fight him.

Liam stood, zipped up his pants, gestured to his human woman. “Out, Janella, we’re being evicted.” The tattoos rippled across his heavy arms as he stretched. Janella ran her hands along his ribs as if she just couldn’t get enough of him, and he swatted her away as lightly as if she’d been a fly. She looked vexed, but not mortified as I would have been. This was not new treatment for Janella.

Malcolm picked up Jerry and carried him out the front door without a word. If drinking from Jerry had given him the virus, Malcolm was not yet impaired. Diane went last, slinging a purse over her shoulder and casting a bright-eyed glance behind her.

“I’ll leave you two lovebirds on your own, then. It’s been fun, honey,” she said lightly, and she slammed the door behind her.

The minute I heard the car start up outside, I fainted.

I’d never done so in my life, and I hoped never to again, but I felt I had some excuse.

I seemed to spend a lot of time around Bill unconscious. That was a crucial thought, and I knew it deserved a lot of pondering, but not just at that moment. When I came to, everything I’d seen and heard rushed back, and I gagged for real. Immediately Bill bent me over the edge of the couch. But I managed to keep my food down, maybe because there wasn’t much in my stomach.

“Do all vampires act like that?” I whispered. My throat was sore and bruised where Jerry had squeezed it. “They were horrible.”

“I tried to catch you at the bar when I found out you weren’t at home,” Bill said. His voice was empty. “But you’d left.”

Though I knew it wouldn’t help a thing, I began crying. I was sure Jerry was dead by now, and I felt I should have done something about that, but I couldn’t have kept silent when he was about to infect Bill. So many things about this short episode had upset me so deeply that I didn’t know where to begin being upset. In maybe fifteen minutes I’d been in fear for my life, in fear for Bill’s life (well—existence), made to witness sex acts that should be strictly private, seen my potential sweetie in the throes of blood lust (emphasis on lust), and nearly been choked to death by a diseased hustler.

On second thought, I gave myself full permission to cry. I sat up and wept and mopped my face with a handkerchief Bill handed me. My curiosity about why a vampire would need a handkerchief was just a little flicker of normality, drenched by the flood of my nervous tears.

Bill had enough sense not to put his arms around me. He sat on the floor, and had the grace to keep his eyes averted while I mopped myself dry.

“When vampires live in nests,” he said suddenly, “they often become more cruel because they egg each other on. They see others like themselves constantly, and so they are reminded of how far from being human they are. They become laws unto themselves. Vampires like me, who live alone, are a little better reminded of their former humanity.”

I listened to his soft voice, going slowly through his thoughts as he made an attempt to explain the unexplainable to me.

“Sookie, our life is seducing and taking and has been for centuries, for some of us. Synthetic blood and grudging human acceptance isn’t going to change that overnight—or over a decade. Diane and Liam and Malcolm have been together for fifty years.”

“How sweet,” I said, and my voice held something I’d never heard from myself before: bitterness. “Their golden wedding anniversary.”

“Can you forget about this?” Bill asked. His huge dark eyes came closer and closer. His mouth was about two inches from mine.

“I don’t know.” The words jerked out of me. “Do you know, I didn’t know if you could do it?”

His eyebrows rose interrogatively. “Do . . . ?”

“Get—” and I stopped, trying to think of a pleasant way to put it. I’d seen more crudity this evening than I’d seen in my lifetime, and I didn’t want to add to it. “An erection,” I said, avoiding his eyes.

“You know better now.” He sounded like he was trying not to be amused. “We can have sex, but we can’t make children or have them. Doesn’t it make you feel better, that Diane can’t have a baby?”

My fuses blew. I opened my eyes and looked at him steadily. “Don’t—you—laugh—at—me.”

“Oh, Sookie,” he said, and his hand rose to touch my cheek.

I dodged his hand and struggled to my feet. He didn’t help me, which was a good thing, but he sat on the floor watching me with a still, unreadable face. Bill’s fangs had retracted, but I knew he was still suffering from hunger. Too bad.

My purse was on the floor by the front door. I wasn’t walking very steadily, but I was walking. I pulled the list of electricians out of a pocket and lay it on a table.

“I have to go.”

He was in front of me suddenly. He’d done one of those vampire things again. “Can I kiss you good-bye?” he asked, his hands down at his sides, making it so obvious he wouldn’t touch me until I said green light.

“No,” I said vehemently. “I can’t stand it after them.”

“I’ll come see you.”

“Yes. Maybe.”

He reached past me to open the door, but I thought he was reaching for me, and I flinched.

I spun on my heel and almost ran to my car, tears blurring my vision again. I was glad the drive home was so short.





3

THE PHONE WAS RINGING. I PULLED MY PILLOW OVER MY head. Surely Gran would get it? As the irritating noise persisted, I realized Gran must be gone shopping or outside working in the yard. I began squirming to the bed table, not happy but resigned. With the headache and regrets of someone who has a terrible hangover (though mine was emotional rather than alcohol induced), I stretched out a shaky hand and grabbed the receiver.

“Yes?” I asked. It didn’t come out quite right. I cleared my throat and tried again. “Hello?”

“Sookie?”

“Um-hum. Sam?”

“Yeah. Listen, cher, do me a favor?”

“What?” I was due to work today anyway, and I didn’t want to hold down Dawn’s shift and mine, too.

“Go by Dawn’s place, and see what she’s up to, would you? She won’t answer her phone, and she hasn’t come in. The delivery truck just pulled up, and I got to tell these guys where to put stuff.”

“Now? You want me to go now?” My old bed had never held on to me harder.

“Could you?” For the first time, he seemed to grasp my unusual mood. I had never refused Sam anything.

“I guess so,” I said, feeling tired all over again at the very idea. I wasn’t too crazy about Dawn, and she wasn’t too crazy about me. She was convinced I’d read her mind and told Jason something she’d been thinking about him, which had caused him to break up with her. If I took that kind of interest in Jason’s romances, I’d never have time to eat or sleep.

I showered and pulled on my work clothes, moving sluggishly. All my bounce had gone flat, like soda with the top left off. I ate cereal and brushed my teeth and told Gran where I was going when I tracked her down; she’d been outside planting petunias in a tub by the back door. She didn’t seem to understand exactly what I meant, but smiled and waved anyway. Gran was getting a little more deaf every week, but I realized that was no great wonder since she was seventy-eight. It was marvelous that she was so strong and healthy, and her brain was sound as a bell.

As I went on my unwelcome errand, I thought about how hard it must have been for Gran to raise two more children after she’d already raised her own. My father, her son, had died when I was seven and Jason ten. When I’d been twenty-three, Gran’s daughter, my Aunt Linda, had died of uterine cancer. Aunt Linda’s girl, Hadley, had vanished into the same subculture that had spawned the Rattrays even before Aunt Linda had passed away, and to this day we didn’t know if Hadley realized her mother was dead. That was a lot of grief to get through, yet Gran had always been strong for us.

I peered through my windshield at the three small duplexes on one side of Berry Street, a run-down block or two that ran behind the oldest part of downtown Bon Temps. Dawn lived in one of them. I spotted her car, a green compact, in the driveway of one of the better-kept houses, and pulled in behind it. Dawn had already put a hanging basket of begonias by her front door, but they looked dry. I knocked.

I waited for a minute or two. I knocked again.

“Sookie, you need some help?” The voice sounded familiar. I turned around and shielded my eyes from the morning sun. Rene Lenier was standing by his pickup, parked across the street at one of the small frame houses that populated the rest of the neighborhood.

“Well,” I began, not sure if I needed help or not, or if I did that Rene could supply it. “Have you seen Dawn? She didn’t come to work today, and she never called in yesterday. Sam asked me to stop by.”

“Sam should come do his own dirty work,” Rene said, which perversely made me defend my boss.

“Truck came in, had to be unloaded.” I turned and knocked again. “Dawn,” I yelled. “Come let me in.” I looked down at the concrete porch. The pine pollen had begun falling two days ago. Dawn’s porch was solid yellow. Mine were the only footprints. My scalp began to prickle.

I barely registered the fact that Rene stood awkwardly by the door to his pickup, unsure whether to stay or go.

Dawn’s duplex was a one-story, quite small, and the door to the other half was just feet away from Dawn’s. Its little driveway was empty, and there were no curtains at the windows. It looked as though Dawn was temporarily out of a neighbor. Dawn had been proud enough to hang curtains, white with dark gold flowers. They were drawn, but the fabric was thin and unlined, and Dawn hadn’t shut the cheap one-inch aluminum blinds. I peered in and discovered the living room held only some flea-market furniture. A coffee mug sat on the table by a lumpy recliner and an old couch covered with a hand-crocheted afghan was pushed against the wall.

“I think I’ll go around back,” I called to Rene. He started across the street as though I’d given him a signal, and I stepped off the front porch. My feet brushed the dusty grass, yellow with pine pollen, and I knew I’d have to dust off my shoes and maybe change my socks before work. During pine pollen season, everything turns yellow. Cars, plants, roofs, windows, all are powdered with a golden haze. The ponds and pools of rainwater have yellow scum around the edges.

Dawn’s bathroom window was so discreetly high that I couldn’t see in. She’d lowered the blinds in the bedroom, but hadn’t closed them tightly. I could see a little through the slats. Dawn was in bed on her back. The bedclothes were tossed around wildly. Her legs were spraddled. Her face was swollen and discolored, and her tongue protruded from her mouth. There were flies crawling on it.

I could hear Rene coming up behind me.

“Go call the police,” I said.

“What you say, Sookie? You see her?”

“Go call the police!”

“Okay, okay!” Rene beat a hasty retreat.

Some female solidarity had made me not want Rene to see Dawn like that, without Dawn’s consent. And my fellow waitress was far beyond consenting.

I stood with my back to the window, horribly tempted to look again in the futile hope I’d made a mistake the first time. Staring at the duplex next door to Dawn’s, maybe a scant six feet away, I wondered how its tenants could have avoided hearing Dawn’s death, which had been violent.

Here came Rene again. His weatherbeaten face was puckered into an expression of deep concern, and his bright brown eyes looked suspiciously shiney.

“Would you call Sam, too?” I asked. Without a word, he turned and trudged back to his place. He was being mighty good. Despite his tendency to gossip, Rene had always been one to help where he saw a need. I remembered him coming out to the house to help Jason hang Gran’s porch swing, a random memory of a day far different from this.

The duplex next door was just like Dawn’s, so I was looking directly at its bedroom window. Now a face appeared, and the window was raised. A tousled head poked out. “What you doing, Sookie Stackhouse?” asked a slow, deep, male voice. I peered at him for a minute, finally placing the face, while trying not to look too closely at the fine, bare chest underneath.

“JB?”

“Sure thing.”

I’d gone to high school with JB du Rone. In fact, some of my few dates had been with JB, who was lovely but so simple that he didn’t care if I read his mind or not. Even under today’s circumstances, I could appreciate JB’s beauty. When your hormones have been held in check as long as mine, it doesn’t take much to set them off. I heaved a sigh at the sight of JB’s muscular arms and pectorals.

“What you doing out here?” he asked again.

“Something bad seems to have happened to Dawn,” I said, not knowing if I should tell him or not. “My boss sent me here to look for her when she didn’t come to work.”

“She in there?” JB simply scrambled out of the window. He had some shorts on, cutoffs.

“Please don’t look,” I asked, holding up my hand and without warning I began crying. I was doing that a lot lately, too. “She looks so awful, JB.”

“Aw, honey,” he said, and bless his country heart, he put an arm around me and patted me on the shoulder. If there was a female around who needed comforting, by God, that was a priority to JB du Rone.

“Dawn liked ’em rough,” he said consolingly, as if that would explain everything.

It might to some people, but not to unworldly me.

“What, rough?” I asked, hoping I had a tissue in my shorts pocket.

I looked up at JB to see him turn a little red.

“Honey, she liked . . . aw, Sookie, you don’t need to hear this.”

I had a widespread reputation for virtue, which I found somewhat ironic. At the moment, it was inconvenient.

“You can tell me, I worked with her,” I said, and JB nodded solemnly, as if that made sense.

“Well, honey, she liked men to—like, bite and hit her.” JB looked weirded out by this preference of Dawn’s. I must have made a face because he said, “I know, I can’t understand why some people like that, either.” JB, never one to ignore an opportunity to make hay, put both arms around me and kept up the patting, but it seemed to concentrate on the middle of my back (checking to see if I was wearing a bra) and then quite a bit lower (JB liked firm rear ends, I remembered).

A lot of questions hovered on the edge of my tongue, but they remained shut inside my mouth. The police got there, in the persons of Kenya Jones and Kevin Prior. When the town police chief had partnered Kenya and Kevin, he’d been indulging his sense of humor, the town figured, for Kenya was at least five foot eleven, the color of bitter chocolate, and built to weather hurricanes. Kevin possibly made it up to five foot eight, had freckles over every visible inch of his pale body, and had the narrow, fatless build of a runner. Oddly enough, the two K’s got along very well, though they’d had some memorable quarrels.

Now they both looked like cops.

“What’s this about, Miss Stackhouse?” Kenya asked. “Rene says something happened to Dawn Green?” She’d scanned JB while she talked, and Kevin was looking at the ground all around us. I had no idea why, but I was sure there was a good police reason.

“My boss sent me here to find out why Dawn missed work yesterday and hadn’t shown up today,” I said. “I knocked on her door, and she didn’t answer, but her car was here. I was worried about her, so I started around the house looking in the windows, and she’s in there.” I pointed behind them, and the two officers turned to look at the window. Then they looked at each other and nodded as if they’d had a whole conversation. While Kenya went over to the window, Kevin went around to the back door.

JB had forgotten to pat while he watched the officers work. In fact, his mouth was a little open, revealing perfect teeth. He wanted to go look through the window more than anything, but he couldn’t shoulder past Kenya, who pretty much took up whatever space was available.

I didn’t want my own thoughts anymore. I relaxed, dropping my guard, and listened to the thoughts of others. Out of the clamor, I picked one thread and concentrated on it.

Kenya Jones turned back to stare through us without seeing us. She was thinking of everything she and Kevin needed to do to keep the investigation as textbook perfect as Bon Temps patrol officers could. She was thinking she’d heard bad things about Dawn and her liking for rough sex. She was thinking that it was no surprise Dawn had met a bad end, though she felt sorry for anyone who ended up with flies crawling on her face. Kenya was thinking she was sorry she’d eaten that extra doughnut that morning at the Nut Hut because it might come back up and that would shame her as a black woman police officer.

I tuned in to another channel.

JB was thinking about Dawn getting killed during rough sex just a few feet away from him, and while it was awful, it was also a little exciting and Sookie was still built wonderful. He wished he could screw her right now. She was so sweet and nice. He was pushing away the humiliation he’d felt when Dawn had wanted him to hit her, and he couldn’t, and it was an old humiliation.

I switched.

Kevin came around the corner thinking that he and Kenya better not botch any evidence and that he was glad no one knew he’d ever slept with Dawn Green. He was furious that someone had killed a woman he knew, and he was hoping it wasn’t a black man because that would make his relationship with Kenya even more tense.

I switched.

Rene Lenier was wishing someone would come and get the body out of the house. He was hoping no one knew he’d slept with Dawn Green. I couldn’t spell out his thoughts exactly, they were very black and snarled. Some people I can’t get a clear reading on. He was very agitated.

Sam came hurrying toward me, slowing down when he saw JB was touching me. I could not read Sam’s thoughts. I could feel his emotions (right now a mix of worry, concern, and anger) but I could not spell out one single thought. This was so fascinating and unexpected that I stepped out of JB’s embrace, wanting to go up to Sam and grab his arms and look into his eyes and really probe around in his head. I remembered when he’d touched me, and I’d shied away. Now he felt me in his head and though he kept on walking toward me, his mind flinched back. Despite his invitation to me, he hadn’t known I would see he was different from others: I picked up on that until he shut me down.

I’d never felt anything like it. It was like an iron door slamming. In my face.

I’d been on the point of reaching out to him instinctively, but my hand dropped to my side. Sam deliberately looked at Kevin, not at me.

“What’s happening, Officer?” Sam asked.

“We’re going to break into this house, Mr. Merlotte, unless you have a master key.”

Why would Sam have a key?

“He’s my landlord,” JB said in my ear, and I jumped.

“He is?” I asked stupidly.

“He owns all three duplexes.”

Sam had been fishing in his pocket, and now he came up with a bunch of keys. He flipped through them expertly, stopping at one and singling it out, getting it off the ring and handing it to Kevin.

“This fits front and back?” Kevin asked. Sam nodded. He still wasn’t looking at me.

Kevin went to the back door of the duplex, out of sight, and we were all so quiet we could hear the key turn in the lock. Then he was in the bedroom with the dead woman, and we could see his face twist when the smell hit him. Holding one hand across his mouth and nose, he bent over the body and put his fingers on her neck. He looked out the window then and shook his head at his partner. Kenya nodded and headed out to the street to use the radio in the patrol car.

“Listen, Sookie, how about going to dinner with me tonight?” JB asked. “This has been tough on you, and you need some fun to make up for it.”

“Thanks, JB.” I was very conscious of Sam listening. “It’s really nice of you to ask. But I have a feeling I’m going to be working extra hours today.”

For just a second, JB’s handsome face was blank. Then comprehension filtered in. “Yeah, Sam’s gotta hire someone else,” he observed. “I got a cousin in Springhill needs a job. Maybe I’ll give her a call. We could live right next door to each other, now.”

I smiled at him, though I am sure it was a very weak smile, as I stood shoulder to shoulder with the man I’d worked with for two years.

“I’m sorry, Sookie,” he said quietly.

“For what?” My own voice was just as low. Was he going to acknowledge what had passed between us—or rather, failed to pass?

“For sending you to check on Dawn. I should have come myself. I was sure she was just shacked up with someone new and needed a reminder that she was supposed to be working. The last time I had to come get her, she yelled at me so much I just didn’t want to deal with it again. So, like a coward, I sent you, and you had to find her like that.”

“You’re full of surprises, Sam.”

He didn’t turn to look at me or make any reply. But his fingers folded around mine. For a long moment, we stood in the sun with people buzzing around us, holding hands. His palm was hot and dry, and his fingers were strong. I felt I had truly connected with another human. But then his grip loosened, and Sam stepped over to talk with the detective, who was emerging from his car, and JB began asking me how Dawn had looked, and the world fell back into its same old groove.

The contrast was cruel. I felt tired all over again, and remembered the night before in more detail than I wanted to. The world seemed a bad and terrible place, all its denizens suspect, and I the lamb wandering through the valley of death with a bell around my neck. I stomped over to my car and opened the door, sank sideways into the seat. I’d be standing plenty today; I’d sit while I could.

JB followed me. Now that he’d rediscovered me, he could not be detached. I remembered when Gran had had high hopes for some permanent relationship between us, when I’d been in high school. But talking to JB, even reading his mind, was as interesting as a kindergarten primer was to an adult reader. It was one of God’s jokes that such a dumb mind had been put in such an eloquent body.

He knelt before me and took my hand. I found myself hoping that some smart rich lady would come along and marry JB and take care of him and enjoy what he had to offer. She would be getting a bargain.

“Where are you working now?” I asked him, just to distract myself.

“My dad’s warehouse,” he said.

That was the job of last resort, the one JB always returned to when he got fired from other jobs for doing something lame-brained, or for not showing up, or for offending some supervisor mortally. JB’s dad ran an auto parts store.

“How are your folks doing?”

“Oh, fine. Sookie, we should do something together.”

Don’t tempt me, I thought.

Someday my hormones were going to get the better of me and I’d do something I’d regret; and I could do worse than do it with JB. But I would hold out and hope for something better. “Thanks, honey,” I said. “Maybe we will. But I’m kind of upset right now.”

“Are you in love with that vampire?” he asked directly.

“Where did you hear that?”

“Dawn said so.” JB’s face clouded as he remembered Dawn was dead. What Dawn had said, I found on scanning JB’s mind, was “That new vampire is interested in Sookie Stackhouse. I’d be better for him. He needs a woman who can take some rough treatment. Sookie would scream if he touched her.”

It was pointless being mad at a dead person, but briefly I indulged myself by doing just that.

Then the detective was walking toward us, and JB got to his feet and moved away.

The detective took JB’s position, squatting on the ground in front of me. I must look in bad shape.

“Miss Stackhouse?” he asked. He was using that quiet intense voice many professionals adopt in a crisis. “I’m Andy Bellefleur.” The Bellefleurs had been around Bon Temps as long as there’d been a Bon Temps, so I wasn’t amused at a man being “beautiful flower.” In fact, I felt sorry for whoever thought it was amusing as I looked down at the block of muscle that was Detective Bellefleur. This particular family member had graduated before Jason, and I’d been one class behind his sister Portia.

He’d been placing me, too. “Your brother doing okay?” he asked, his voice still quiet, not quite as neutral. It sounded like he’d had a run-in or two with Jason.

“The little I see of him, he’s doing fine,” I answered.

“And your grandmother?”

I smiled. “She’s out planting flowers this morning.”

“That’s wonderful,” he said, doing that sincere head shake that’s supposed to indicate admiring amazement. “Now, I understand that you work at Merlotte’s?”

“Yes.”

“And so did Dawn Green?”

“Yes.”

“When was the last time you saw Dawn?”

“Two days ago. At work.” I already felt exhausted. Without shifting my feet from the ground or my arm from the steering wheel, I lay my head sideways on the headrest of the driver’s seat.

“Did you talk to her then?”

I tried to remember. “I don’t think so.”

“Were you close to Miss Green?”

“No.”

“And why did you come here today?”

I explained about working for Dawn yesterday, about Sam’s phone call this morning.

“Did Mr. Merlotte tell you why he didn’t want to come here himself?”

“Yes, a truck was there to unload. Sam has to show the guys where to put the boxes.” Sam also did a lot of the unloading himself, half the time, to speed up the process.

“Do you think Mr. Merlotte had any relationship with Dawn?”

“He was her boss.”

“No, outside work.”

“Nope.”

“You sound pretty positive.”

“I am.”

“Do you have a relationship with Sam?”

“No.”

“Then how are you so sure?”

Good question. Because from time to time I’d heard thoughts that indicated that if she didn’t hate Sam, Dawn sure as hell wasn’t real fond of him? Not too smart a thing to tell the detective.

“Sam keeps everything real professional at the bar,” I said. It sounded lame, even to me. It just happened to be the truth.

“Did you know anything about Dawn’s personal life?”

“No.”

“You weren’t friendly?”

“Not particularly.” My thoughts drifted as the detective bent his head in thought. At least that was what it looked like.

“Why is that?”

“I guess we didn’t have anything in common.”

“Like what? Give me an example.”

I sighed heavily, blowing my lips out in exasperation. If we didn’t have anything in common, how could I give him an example?

“Okay,” I said slowly. “Dawn had a real active social life, and she liked to be with men. She wasn’t so crazy about spending time with women. Her family is from Monroe, so she didn’t have family ties here. She drank, and I don’t. I read a lot, and she didn’t. That enough?”

Andy Bellefleur scanned my face to see if I was giving him attitude. He must have been reassured by what he saw.

“So, you two didn’t ever see each other after working hours?”

“That’s correct.”

“Doesn’t it seem strange to you that Sam Merlotte asked you to check on Dawn, then?”

“No, not at all,” I said stoutly. At least, it didn’t seem strange now, after Sam’s description of Dawn’s tantrum. “This is on my way to the bar, and I don’t have children like Arlene, the other waitress on our shift. So it would be easier for me.” That was pretty sound, I thought. If I said Dawn had screamed at Sam the last time he’d been here, that would give exactly the wrong impression.

“What did you do after work two days ago, Sookie?”

“I didn’t come to work. I had the day off.”

“And your plan for that day was—?”

“I sunbathed and helped Gran clean house, and we had company.”

“Who would that be?”

“That would be Bill Compton.”

“The vampire.”

“Right.”

“How late was Mr. Compton at your house?”

“I don’t know. Maybe midnight or one.”

“How did he seem to you?”

“He seemed fine.”

“Edgy? Irritated?”

“No.”

“Miss Stackhouse, we need to talk to you more at the station house. This is going to take a while, here, as you can see.”

“Okay, I guess.”

“Can you come in a couple of hours?”

I looked at my wristwatch. “If Sam doesn’t need me to work.”

“You know, Miss Stackhouse, this really takes precedence over working at a bar.”

Okay, I was pissed off. Not because he thought murder investigations were more important than getting to work on time; I agreed with him, there. It was his unspoken prejudice against my particular job.

“You may not think my job amounts to much, but it’s one I’m good at, and I like it. I am as worthy of respect as your sister, the lawyer, Andy Bellefleur, and don’t you forget it. I am not stupid, and I am not a slut.”

The detective turned red, slowly and unattractively. “I apologize,” Andy said stiffly. He was still trying to deny the old connection, the shared high school, the knowledge of each other’s family. He was thinking he should have been a detective in another town, where he could treat people the way he thought a police officer should.

“No, you’ll be a better detective here if you can get over that attitude,” I told him. His gray eyes flared wide in shock, and I was childishly glad I’d rocked him, though I was sure I would pay for it sooner or later. I always did when I gave people a peek at my disability.

Mostly, people couldn’t get away from me fast enough when I’d given them a taste of mind reading, but Andy Bellefleur was fascinated. “It’s true, then,” he breathed, as if we were somewhere alone instead of sitting in the driveway of a run-down duplex in rural Louisiana.

“No, forget it,” I said quickly. “I can just tell sometimes by the way people look what they’re thinking.”

He deliberately thought about unbuttoning my blouse. But I was wary now, back to my normal state of barricaded seige, and I did no more than smile brightly. I could tell I wasn’t fooling him, though.

“When you’re ready for me, you come to the bar. We can talk in the storeroom or Sam’s office,” I said firmly and swung my legs into the car.

The bar was buzzing when I got there. Sam had called Terry Bellefleur, Andy’s second cousin if I recalled correctly, in to watch the bar while he talked to the police at Dawn’s place. Terry had had a bad war in Vietnam, and he existed narrowly on government disability of some kind. He’d been wounded, captured, held prisoner for two years, and now his thoughts were most often so scary that I was extra-special careful when I was around him. Terry had a hard life, and acting normal was even harder for him than it was for me. Terry didn’t drink much, thank God.

Today I gave him a light kiss on the cheek while I got my tray and scrubbed my hands. Through the window into the little kitchen I could see Lafayette Reynold, the cook, flipping burgers and sinking a basket of fries into hot oil. Merlotte’s serves a few sandwiches, and that’s all. Sam doesn’t want to run a restaurant, but a bar with some food available.

“What was that for, not that I’m not honored,” Terry said. He’d raised his eyebrows. Terry was red-haired, though when he needed a shave, I could tell his whiskers were gray. Terry spent a lot of time outside, but his skin never exactly tanned. It got a rough, reddened look, which made the scars on his left cheek stand out more clearly. That didn’t seem to bother Terry. Arlene had been to bed with Terry one night when she’d been drinking, and she’d confided in me that Terry had many scars even worse than the one on his cheek.

“Just for being here,” I said.

“It true about Dawn?”

Lafayette put two plates on the serving hatch. He winked at me with a sweep of his thick, false lashes. Lafayette wears a lot of makeup. I was so used to him I never thought of it anymore, but now his eye shadow brought the boy, Jerry, to my mind. I’d let him go with the three vampires without protest. That had probably been wrong, but realistic. I couldn’t have stopped them from taking him. I couldn’t have gotten the police to catch up with them in time. He was dying anyway, and he was taking as many vampires and humans with him as he could; and he was already a killer himself. I told my conscience this would be the last talk we’d have about Jerry.

“Arlene, burgers up,” Terry called, jerking me back into the here and how. Arlene came over to grab the plates. She gave me a look that said she was going to pump me dry at the first chance she got. Charlsie Tooten was working, too. She filled in when one of the regular women got sick or just didn’t show. I hoped Charlsie would take Dawn’s place full-time. I’d always liked her.

“Yeah, Dawn’s dead,” I told Terry. He didn’t seem to mind my long pause.

“What happened to her?”

“I don’t know, but it wasn’t peaceful.” I’d seen blood on the sheets, not a lot, but some.

“Maudette,” Terry said, and I instantly understood.

“Maybe,” I said. It sure was possible that whoever had done in Dawn was the same person who’d killed Maudette.

Of course, everyone in Renard Parish came in that day, if not for lunch, then for an afternoon cup of coffee or a beer. If they couldn’t make their work schedule bend around that, they waited until they clocked out and came in on their way home. Two young women in our town murdered in one month? You bet people wanted to talk.

Sam returned about two, with heat radiating off his body and sweat trickling down his face from standing out in the shadeless yard at the crime scene. He told me that Andy Bellefleur had said he was coming to talk to me again soon.

“I don’t know why,” I said, maybe a tad sullenly. “I never hung around with Dawn. What happened to her, did they tell you?”

“Someone strangled her after beating on her a little,” Sam said. “But she had some old tooth marks, too. Like Maudette.”

“There are lots of vampires, Sam,” I said, answering his unspoken comment.

“Sookie.” His voice was so serious and quiet. It made me remember how he’d held my hand at Dawn’s house, and then I remembered how he’d shut me out of his mind, known I was probing, known how to keep me out. “Honey, Bill is a good guy, for a vampire, but he’s just not human.”

“Honey, neither are you,” I said, very quietly but very sharply. And I turned my back on Sam, not exactly wanting to admit why I was so angry with him, but wanting him to know it nonetheless.

I worked like a demon. Whatever her faults, Dawn had been efficient, and Charlsie just couldn’t keep up the pace. She was willing, and I was sure she’d catch up with the rhythm of the bar, but for tonight, Arlene and I had to take up the slack.

I earned a ton of money in tips that evening and on into the night when people found out I’d actually discovered the body. I just kept my face solemn and got through it, not wanting to offend customers who just wanted to know what everyone else in town wanted to know.

On my way home, I allowed myself to relax a little. I was exhausted. The last thing I expected to see, after I turned into the little drive through the woods that led to our house, was Bill Compton. He was leaning against a pine tree waiting for me. I drove past him a little, almost deciding to ignore him. But then I stopped.

He opened my door. Without looking him in the eyes, I got out. He seemed comfortable in the night, in a way I never could be. There were too many childhood taboos about the night and the darkness and things that went bump.

Come to think of it, Bill was one of those things. No wonder he felt at ease.

“Are you going to look at your feet all night, or are you going to talk to me?” he asked in a voice that was just above a whisper.

“Something happened you should know about.”

“Tell me.” He was trying to do something to me: I could feel his power hovering around me, but I batted it away. He sighed.

“I can’t stand up,” I said wearily. “Let’s sit on the ground or something. My feet are tired.”

In answer, he picked me up and set me on the hood of the car. Then he stood in front of me, his arms crossed, very obviously waiting.

“Tell me.”

“Dawn was murdered. Just like Maudette Pickens.”

“Dawn?”

Suddenly, I felt a little better. “The other waitress at the bar.”

“The redheaded one, the one who’s been married so often?”

I felt a lot better. “No, the dark-haired one, the one who kept bumping into your chair with her hips to get you to notice her.”

“Oh, that one. She came to my house.”

“Dawn? When?”

“After you left the other night. The night the other vampires were there. She’s lucky she missed them. She was very confident of her ability to handle anything.”

I looked up at him. “Why is she so lucky? Wouldn’t you have protected her?”

Bill’s eyes were totally dark in the moonlight. “I don’t think so,” he said.

“You are . . .”

“I’m a vampire, Sookie. I don’t think like you. I don’t care about people automatically.”

“You protected me.”

“You’re different.”

“Yeah? I’m a waitress, like Dawn. I come from a plain family, like Maudette. What’s so different?”

I was in a sudden rage. I knew what was coming.

His cool finger touched the middle of my forehead. “Different,” he said. “You’re not like us. But you’re not like them, either.”

I felt a flare of rage so intense it was almost divine. I hauled off and hit him, an insane thing to do. It was like hitting a Brink’s armored truck. In a flash, he had me off the car and pinned to him, my arms bound to my sides by one of his arms.

“No!” I screamed. I kicked and fought, but I might as well have saved the energy. Finally, I sagged against him.

My breathing was ragged, and so was his. But I didn’t think it was for the same reason.

“Why did you think I needed to know about Dawn?” He sounded so reasonable, you’d think the struggle hadn’t happened.

“Well, Mr. Lord of Darkness,” I said furiously, “Maudette had old bite marks on her thighs, and the police told Sam that Dawn had bite marks, too.”

If silence can be characterized, his was thoughtful. While he was mulling, or whatever vampires do, his embrace loosened. One hand began rubbing my back absently, as if I was a puppy who had whimpered.

“You imply they didn’t die from these bites.”

“No. From strangulation.”

“Not a vampire, then.” His tone put it beyond question.

“Why not?”

“If a vampire had been feeding from these women, they would have been drained instead of strangled. They wouldn’t have been wasted like that.”

Just when I was beginning to be comfortable with Bill, he’d say something so cold, so vampirey, I had to start all over again.

“Then,” I said wearily, “either you have a crafty vampire with great self-control, or you have someone who’s determined to kill women who’ve been with vampires.”

“Hmmm.”

I didn’t feel very good about either of those choices.

“Do you think I’d do that?” he asked.

The question was unexpected. I wriggled in his pinioning embrace to look up at him.

“You’ve taken great care to point out how heartless you are,” I reminded him. “What do you really want me to believe?”

And it was so wonderful not to know. I almost smiled.

“I could have killed them, but I wouldn’t do it here, or now,” Bill said. He had no color in the moonlight except for the dark pools of his eyes and the dark arches of his brows. “This is where I want to stay. I want a home.”

A vampire, yearning for home.

Bill read my face. “Don’t pity me, Sookie. That would be a mistake.” He seemed to be willing me to stare into his eyes.

“Bill, you can’t glamor me, or whatever you do. You can’t enchant me into pulling my T-shirt down for you to bite me, you can’t convince me you weren’t ever here, you can’t do any of your usual stuff. You have to be regular with me, or just force me.”

“No,” he said, his mouth almost on mine. “I won’t force you.”

I fought the urge to kiss him. But at least I knew it was my very own urge, not a manufactured one.

“So, if it wasn’t you,” I said, struggling to keep on course, “then Maudette and Dawn knew another vampire. Maudette went to the vampire bar in Shreveport. Maybe Dawn did, too. Will you take me there?”

“Why?” he asked, sounding no more than curious.

I just couldn’t explain being in danger to someone who was so used to being beyond it. At least at night. “I’m not sure Andy Bellefleur will go to the trouble,” I lied.

“There are still Bellefleurs here,” he said, and there was something different in his voice. His arms hardened around me to the point of pain.

“Yes,” I said. “Lots of them. Andy is a police detective. His sister, Portia, is a lawyer. His cousin Terry is a veteran and a bartender. He substitutes for Sam. There are lots of others.”

“Bellefleur . . .”

I was getting crushed.

“Bill,” I said, my voice squeaky with panic.

He loosened his grip immediately. “Excuse me,” he said formally.

“I have to go to bed,” I said. “I’m really tired, Bill.”

He set me down on the gravel with scarcely a bump. He looked down at me.

“You told those other vampires that I belonged to you,” I said.

“Yes.”

“What exactly did that mean?”

“That means that if they try to feed on you, I’ll kill them,” he said. “It means you are my human.”

“I have to say I’m glad you did that, but I’m not really sure what being your human entails,” I said cautiously. “And I don’t recall being asked if that was okay with me.”

“Whatever it is, it’s probably better than partying with Malcolm, Liam, and Diane.”

He wasn’t going to answer me directly.

“Are you going to take me to the bar?”

“What’s your next night off?”

“Two nights from now.”

“Then, at sunset. I’ll drive.”

“You have a car?”

“How do you think I get places?” There might have been a smile on his shining face. He turned to melt into the woods. Over his shoulder he said, “Sookie. Do me proud.”

I was left standing with my mouth open.

Do him proud indeed.

